


actinomycosis






actinomycosis is a rare type of bacterial infection. it can be very serious but can usually be cured with antibiotics.



treatment for actinomycosis
actinomycosis is treated with antibiotics. treatment starts off in hospital with antibiotics given directly into a vein (intravenously).
when you're well enough to go home, you'll be given tablets to take for a few months.
it's important to keep taking antibiotics until they're finished, even when you feel better.
you might also need surgery to drain areas of pus (abscesses) and cut out the surrounding area if it's infected.







non-urgent advice:  contact your gp or specialist if:
      





your symptoms get worse or don't improve after leaving hospital

get help quickly if treatment doesn't seem to be working. the infection can spread to other parts of your body and can be life-threatening.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus






how you get actinomycosis
the bacteria that cause actinomycosis normally live harmlessly in the body. they only cause an infection if they get into the lining of areas such as the mouth or gut.
you can't spread the infection to other people.
any part of the body can be infected. where it starts depends on what caused it. 




possible causes
symptoms




jaw or mouth: tooth decay, an injury, dental surgery
dark lumps on your cheek or neck, difficulty chewing, pus leaking from small holes in your skin


lungs: inhaling liquid or food contaminated with the bacteria
shortness of breath, chest pain, a cough, pus leaking from small holes in your skin


tummy: burst appendix, surgery
diarrhoea or constipation, pain, a lump or swelling in your tummy, pus leaking from small holes in your skin


pelvis: leaving an iud contraceptive coil in for too long
pain low down in your tummy, vaginal bleeding or unusual discharge, a lump or swelling in your lower tummy







you can't always prevent actinomycosis
actinomycosis is very rare, so the chances of getting it are extremely small.
you can help reduce your risk by:

looking after your teeth and gums
not leaving an iud in for longer than recommended – they usually last 5 to 10 years, depending on the type you have




      page last reviewed: 19 september 2017
      next review due: 19 september 2020
    




