


anaesthesia






anaesthesia means "loss of sensation". medications that cause anaesthesia are called anaesthetics.
anaesthetics are used during tests and surgical operations to numb sensation in certain areas of the body or induce sleep. 
this prevents pain and discomfort, and enables a wide range of medical procedures to be carried out.
local anaesthetics and general anaesthetics are two commonly used types of anaesthetics: 

local anaesthetic is where a small area of the body is numbed and you remain fully conscious – often used during minor procedures
general anaesthetic is where you're totally unconscious and unaware of the procedure – often used for more serious operations




how anaesthetics work
anaesthetics work by stopping the nerve signals that keep you awake and aware from reaching your brain. 
during this state of induced sleep, procedures can be carried out without you feeling anything. 
after the anaesthetic has worn off, the nerve signals will be able to reach your brain, and consciousness and feeling will return.



types of anaesthesia
as well as local and general anaesthetic, there are a number of other types of anaesthesia. 
unlike general anaesthetic, these do not make you unconscious – they just stop you feeling pain in a particular area of your body. 
the different types of anaesthetic are:

regional anaesthetic – a local anaesthetic given to a specific region of your body, leading to numbness or pain relief for deeper operations where more extensive numbness is needed 
epidural anaesthesia – a type of regional anaesthetic usually used to numb the lower half of the body; for example, as pain relief during labour and childbirth
spinal anaesthetic – a type of regional anaesthetic used to give total numbness, lasting about 3 hours, to the lower parts of the body, such as in the base of your spine or in your lower back, so surgery can be safely carried out in this area 
sedation – medication that makes you feel sleepy and relaxes you both physically and mentally; it's sometimes used to keep you calm during minor, painful or unpleasant procedures 

different types of anaesthesia can be used in combination. for example, a regional anaesthetic can be used with a general anaesthetic to relieve pain after an operation.
a sedative is also sometimes used with a regional anaesthetic to help you feel relaxed and calm, as well as pain-free, during an operation.



how anaesthetics are given
an anaesthetic can be given in a number of ways:

as an ointment, spray or drops 
as an injection into a vein 
as a gas you breathe in




anaesthetists
anaesthetists are doctors who have received specialist training in anaesthesia. they'll give you your anaesthetic and be responsible for your safety and wellbeing during your procedure.
before the procedure, your anaesthetist will discuss a number of things with you, including:

the types of anaesthetic appropriate for the procedure you're having 
any risks or side effects associated with different types of anaesthetic

they'll plan your anaesthetic and pain control with you, taking into account any preferences you have for a particular type of anaesthetic. you should ask your anaesthetist to clarify anything you're unsure about.
your anaesthetist will carefully monitor you throughout your operation and make sure you wake up comfortably afterwards. they may also help with any pain relief you might need after the procedure.



side effects
anaesthetics consist of a number of medications that can cause side effects in some people. your anaesthetist will tell you about any side effects you may experience after having a specific type of anaesthetic and measures that will be taken to reduce these.  
some common side effects that can occur after a general anaesthetic or some regional anaesthetics include:

feeling or being sick 
dizziness and feeling faint 
feeling cold or shivering 
headaches 
itchiness 
bruising and soreness 
difficulty peeing
aches and pains 

the side effects of anaesthetic usually do not last very long and, if necessary, some of them can be treated.
tell the healthcare professionals treating you if you experience any of the above side effects, or if you're in pain after your procedure.



risks and complications
in recent years, having anaesthesia has become very safe. advances in equipment, medication and training mean serious problems are rare.
however, as with any type of surgery or medical procedure, there's a potential risk of complications. 
the benefits and risks of surgery and anaesthesia will be carefully weighed up and explained to you before you have any operation.
the complications of anaesthesia listed below are very rare.
permanent nerve damage
this can cause numbness or paralysis (inability to move a part of the body), although this may be a result of the surgery itself. 
damage to the peripheral nerves, which run between the spinal cord and the rest of the body, occurs in around 1 in 1,000 people having a general anaesthetic.
an allergic reaction to an anaesthetic medication
although an allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) can be severe, appropriate treatment is on hand to enable the best chance of dealing with this immediately and effectively. 
it's not clear exactly how often anaesthetics cause anaphylaxis, but the best estimate is that a life-threatening allergic reaction occurs in between 1 in 10,000 and 1 in 20,000 anaesthetics. 
death
if you're a healthy patient having non-emergency surgery, death is very rare at around 1 in 100,000 people having general anaesthetic. however, this may increase depending on the factors mentioned below.
factors affecting risk of complications
your risk of developing complications will depend on a number of factors, including:  

your medical history – for example, whether you have any other serious medical conditions or illnesses 
personal factors – for example, whether you smoke or are overweight; if you smoke, stopping several weeks before your operation will reduce your risk of having breathing problems, and losing weight will also help reduce your risk 
the type of procedure – for example, whether it's a planned or an emergency procedure, or whether it's a major or minor procedure 
the type of anaesthetic – local anaesthesia can have advantages over general anaesthesia in the right circumstances

before your procedure, your anaesthetist will explain if there are any particular risks of developing possible complications.
in most cases, the benefits outweigh the risks. any concerns you have should be discussed with your anaesthetist before surgery.



more information
the royal college of anaesthetists has more information about anaesthesia.
you can also find out more about specific types of anaesthesia by reading:

more about local anaesthetic  
more about general anaesthetic  
more about epidural anaesthesia




      page last reviewed: 14 june 2018
      next review due: 14 june 2021
    




