


aspergillosis






aspergillosis is a condition caused by aspergillus mould. there are several different types of aspergillosis. most affect the lungs and cause breathing difficulties.



how you get aspergillosis
aspergillosis is usually caused by inhaling tiny bits of mould. the mould is found in lots of places, including:

soil, compost and rotting leaves
plants, trees and crops
dust
damp buildings
air conditioning systems

you cannot catch aspergillosis from someone else or from animals.

information: 
most people who breathe in the mould do not get ill.




aspergillosis is rare in healthy people
you're usually only at risk of aspergillosis if you have:

a lung condition – such as asthma, cystic fibrosis or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd)
a weakened immune system – for example, if you have had an organ transplant or are having chemotherapy
had tuberculosis (tb) in the past




symptoms of aspergillosis
symptoms of aspergillosis include:

shortness of breath
a cough – you may cough up blood or lumps of mucus
wheezing (a whistling sound when breathing)
a high temperature of 38c or above
weight loss

if you already have a lung condition, your existing symptoms may get worse.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you have:
      





a cough for more than 3 weeks
a lung condition that's getting worse or harder to control with your usual treatment
a weakened immune system and symptoms of aspergillosis

get an urgent gp appointment if you cough up blood. call 111 if you cannot see your gp.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus





what happens at your appointment
your gp will check for an obvious cause of your symptoms, like a chest infection or asthma.
if they're not sure what the problem is, they may refer you to a specialist for tests such as:

x-rays and scans
blood tests or tests on a sample of mucus
allergy tests
a bronchoscopy – where a thin, flexible tube with a camera at the end is used to look in your lungs




treatment for aspergillosis depends on the type
treatment usually helps control the symptoms. if it's not treated or well controlled, there's a risk it could damage your lungs.




common types
treatment




allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (abpa) – an allergy to aspergillus mould
steroid tablets and antifungal tablets for a few months (possibly longer)


chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (cpa) – a long-term lung infection
long-term (possibly lifelong) treatment with antifungal tablets


aspergilloma – a ball of mould in the lungs, often linked to cpa
surgery to remove the ball if it's causing symptoms


invasive pulmonary aspergillus (ipa) – a life-threatening infection in people with a weakened immune system
antifungal medicine given directly into a vein in hospital







you cannot always prevent aspergillosis
it's almost impossible to completely avoid aspergillus mould.
but there are things you can do to reduce your risk of aspergillosis if you have a lung condition or weakened immune system.

do





      try to avoid places where aspergillus mould is often found, such as compost heaps and piles of dead leaves
    




      close your windows if there's construction work or digging outside
    




      wear a face mask in dusty places
    




      consider using an air purifier at home – devices with hepa filters are best
    



don't






      do not dry your laundry in your bedroom or living areas, if possible – ideally dry it outside or in a tumble dryer
    



information: 
you can find out more about aspergillosis on the support for people with aspergillosis website.




      page last reviewed: 23 january 2018
      next review due: 23 january 2021
    




