


blepharitis







blepharitis causes red, swollen and itchy eyelids. it can normally be treated by washing your eyelids every day. the condition is not usually serious, but can lead to other problems, such as dry eyes, cysts and conjunctivitis, especially if it's not treated.



check if you have blepharitis
blepharitis symptoms often come and go.symptoms of blepharitis include:sore eyelidsitchy eyesa gritty feeling in the eyesflakes or crusts around the roots of the eyelashesred eyes or eyelidseyelids sticking together in the morning when you wake up



      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/256626/view




if you're not sure it's blepharitisread more about eyelid problems.




things you can do to treat and prevent blepharitis

do





clean your eyelids at least once a day





continue to clean your eyes, even if your symptoms clear up




don't






do not wear contact lenses while you have symptoms






do not use eye makeup, especially eyeliner, while you have symptoms



how to clean your eyessoak a clean flannel or cotton wool in warm water and place on your eye for 10 minutes.gently massage your eyelids for around 30 seconds.clean your eyelids using cotton wool or a cotton bud. it might help to use a small amount of baby shampoo in water.


ask a pharmacist how to treat blepharitisa pharmacist might suggest things to help keep your eyelids clean, including:eye pads and wipeseyedrops






find a pharmacy








non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




your symptoms do not improve after a few weeks of cleaning your eyelids

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus






treatment for blepharitis from a gp
your gp might suggest antibiotic creams or drops. if these do not help after 6 weeks, they may recommend antibiotic tablets.




what causes blepharitis?
blepharitis can be caused by:a type of bacteria that lives on the skina skin condition, such as atopic dermatitisblepharitis cannot be spread to other people.



      page last reviewed: 28 april 2019
      next review due: 28 april 2022
    




