


blisters







blisters should heal on their own within a week. they can be painful while they heal, but you shouldn't need to see a gp.




how you can treat a blister yourself
to relieve any pain, use an ice pack (or a bag of frozen vegetables wrapped in a towel) on the blister for up to 30 minutes.to protect the blister and help prevent infection:

do





cover blisters that are likely to burst with a soft plaster or dressing





wash your hands before touching a burst blister





allow the fluid in a burst blister to drain before covering it with a plaster or dressing




don't






do not burst a blister yourself






do not peel the skin off a burst blister






do not pick at the edges of the remaining skin






do not wear the shoes or use the equipment that caused your blister until it heals






a pharmacist can help with blisters
to protect your blister from becoming infected, a pharmacist can recommend a plaster or dressing to cover it while it heals.a hydrocolloid dressing can help reduce pain and speed up healing.






find a pharmacy






check if you have a blister



    blisters are small pockets of clear fluid under a layer of skin.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/157872/view





    blood blisters are red or black and filled with blood instead of clear fluid.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/284441/view





    if the blister is infected it can be red, hot and filled with green or yellow pus.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/575658/view



important
don't ignore an infected blister. without treatment it could lead to a skin or blood infection.








non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




a blister is very painful or keeps coming backthe skin looks infected – it's red, hot and the blister is filled with green or yellow pusa blister is in an unusual place – such as your eyelids, mouth or genitalsseveral blisters have appeared for no reasona blister was caused by a burn or scald, sunburn, or an allergic reaction

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







treatment from a gp
your gp might burst a large or painful blister using a sterilised needle. if your blister is infected, they may prescribe antibiotics.they can also offer treatment and advice if blisters are caused by a medical condition.



how to prevent blisters
blisters develop to protect damaged skin and help it heal. they are mostly caused by friction, burns and skin reactions, such as an allergic reaction.blood blisters appear when blood vessels in the skin have also been damaged. they are often more painful than a regular blister.if you regularly get friction blisters:wear comfortable, well-fitting shoesgradually break in new shoeswear thicker wool socks during exercisedust talcum powder in your socks if you get sweaty feetwear protective gloves when you exercise or if you use tools at work



    conditions that can cause blisters
    


chickenpox – a childhood illness that causes itchy red spotscold sores – small blisters that develop on the lips or around the mouth, caused by a virusgenital herpes – a sexually transmitted infection (sti) that most commonly affects the groinbullous impetigo – a contagious bacterial skin infectionpompholyx – a type of eczemascabies – a skin condition caused by tiny miteshand, foot and mouth disease – a viral infection that usually affects young children





      page last reviewed: 12 december 2017
      next review due: 12 december 2020
    




