


blood clots






blood clots can be very serious and need to be treated quickly. staying healthy and active can help prevent them.







urgent advice: get advice from 111 now if you think you have a blood clot
      




symptoms of a blood clot include:throbbing or cramping pain, swelling, redness and warmth in a leg or armsudden breathlessness, sharp chest pain (may be worse when you breathe in) and a cough or coughing up bloodblood clots can be life threatening if not treated quickly.111 will tell you what to do. they can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.



    other ways to get help
    


get an urgent gp appointmenta gp may be able to help you.ask your gp practice for an urgent appointment.






what a blood clot in a leg can look like



    swelling and redness caused by a clot in the left leg
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/258330/view





    red and swollen right leg caused by a clot
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/440619/view


a blood clot in a leg is called deep vein thrombosis (dvt).




immediate action required: call 999 or go to a&e if:
      




you're struggling to breathesomeone has passed outthis could be a blood clot in the lungs (pulmonary embolism), which needs to be treated immediately.





check if you're at risk of blood clotsblood clots are rare in young, healthy people.you're more likely to get them if you:are staying in or recently left hospital – especially if you can't move around much (like after an operation)are overweightsmokeare using combined hormonal contraception such as the combined pill, contraceptive patch or vaginal ringhave had a blood clot beforethere are also other things that increase your risk of clots.



how to prevent blood clotsif you're at a high risk of blood clots – for example, you're in hospital – follow the advice of your care team about preventing clots.this may involve wearing stockings that improve your blood flow or taking medicine to reduce the risk of clots (anticoagulants).there are also things you can do to help avoid clots.

do





stay active – even just taking regular walks can help





drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration – you're more likely to get a clot if you're dehydrated





try to lose weight if you're overweight





wear flight stockings or flight socks to improve your blood flow on long flights – a pharmacist can advise you about this




don't






do not sit for long periods without moving, if you can avoid it






do not drink lots of alcohol – this can make you dehydrated






do not smoke






information: 
social care and support guideif you:need help with day-to-day living because of illness or disabilitycare for someone regularly because they're ill, elderly or disabled, including family membersour guide to care and support explains your options and where you can get support.




      page last reviewed: 26 january 2018
      next review due: 26 january 2021
    




