


blushing






blushing is a common problem that can be embarrassing and affect your day to day life. there are things you can do to help stop it.
how to help stop yourself blushing



do





      breathe deeply and try to relax – read about breathing exercises you can do to help reduce stress and anxiety
    




      keep cool by removing a layer of clothing and drinking water
    




      wear make-up that reduces the redness of your skin in stressful situations like an interview or when giving a presentation
    



don't






      do not eat spicy foods or drink alcohol or hot drinks if they make you blush
    




common causes of blushing
lots of different things can cause blushing. it's often caused by feeling embarrassed, hot or anxious.
sometimes other symptoms you have might give you an idea of what's causing it.




symptoms
possible causes




a red face most of the time, small blood vessels can be seen under your skin, spots
rosacea


hot flushes, night sweats, vaginal dryness, low mood, reduced sex drive
menopause


sweating a lot, particularly in your armpits, hands, feet, face and groin
excessive sweating


swelling in your neck, anxiety and irritability, mood swings, difficulty sleeping, tiredness
overactive thyroid




some medicines can also cause blushing. check the side effects of any medicine you're taking to see if blushing or flushing is listed.






non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      





your blushing is affecting your everyday life
you think your blushing might be caused by a medical condition or a medicine you're taking


information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus






treatments from your gp
treatment for blushing will depend on the cause.
for example, your gp may suggest:

a talking therapy like cognitive behavioural therapy (cbt) if your blushing is caused by stress or anxiety
medicines to help reduce anxiety, stop blushing or treat an underlying condition

very rarely, surgery may be an option if blushing is severe and other treatments have not helped. but this can cause serious and long-lasting side effects.



      page last reviewed: 28 march 2019
      next review due: 28 march 2022
    




