



overview
        
 - 
          bowel incontinence
        



contents


overview


treatment









bowel incontinence, or faecal incontinence, is when you have problems controlling your bowels.
it can be very upsetting and embarrassing, but it's important to get medical advice if you have it because treatment can help.



signs and symptoms
bowel incontinence can affect people in different ways.
you may have a problem if:

you have sudden urges to poo that you can't control
you soil yourself without realising you needed the toilet
you sometimes leak poo – for example, when you pass wind
it happens every day or from time to time – a one-off "accident" when you're ill with diarrhoea isn't usually a problem
it's affecting your daily life – for example, it stops you socialising

you may also have other symptoms, such as constipation, diarrhoea, passing wind or bloating.



when to get medical advice
see a gp if you have difficulty controlling your bowels. don't be embarrassed about talking to someone about it. 
remember that:

it's not something to be ashamed of
it's common and gps are used to seeing people with it
it's not something you have to put up with
it probably won't get better on its own
it can be treated

if you'd prefer not to see a gp, you may be able to make an appointment at an nhs continence service instead. call your local hospital for details of your nearest service.



treatments
treatment can help improve incontinence and reduce the impact it has on your life. the best treatment for you depends on what's causing the problem.
treatments for bowel incontinence include:

continence products – such as pads you wear in your underwear or small plugs you put in your bottom
changes to your diet – such as avoiding foods that make diarrhoea worse
medicines to reduce constipation or diarrhoea
exercises to strengthen the muscles used to control your bowels – called pelvic floor exercises

surgery may be considered if other treatments don't help.
read more about treatments for bowel incontinence.



causes
there are lots of possible causes of bowel incontinence. often it's caused by a combination of problems.
causes of bowel incontinence include:

severe or long-lasting constipation or diarrhoea
irritable bowel syndrome (ibs)
inflammatory bowel disease – such as crohn's disease
severe piles (haemorrhoids)
childbirth or surgery damaging the muscles or nerves you use to control your bowels
conditions that can affect the nerves in your bottom – such as diabetes, a stroke or spina bifida

don't try to self-diagnose the cause of your problems. get medical help so the underlying cause can be identified and treated.



more information
for more advice, information and support, see:

nhs advice on living with incontinence – including more information on continence products
bladder & bowel community – including more on treatments, ways to cope and patient stories












    
    media last reviewed: 10 may 2018
    media review due: 9 may 2021
  




      page last reviewed: 2 february 2018
      next review due: 2 february 2021
    





next
:
treatment










