



overview
        
 - 
          brain abscess
        



contents


overview


causes


treatment









a brain abscess is a pus-filled swelling in the brain. it usually occurs when bacteria or fungi enter the brain tissue after an infection or severe head injury.
although the risk of developing a brain abscess is extremely low in england, it is a life-threatening condition and should be diagnosed and treated as soon as possible.



symptoms of a brain abscess
the symptoms of a brain abscess may develop quickly or slowly but can include:

headache – which is often severe, located in a single section of the head and cannot be relieved with painkillers 
changes in mental state – such as confusion or irritability 
problems with nerve function – such as muscle weakness, slurred speech or paralysis on one side of the body 
a high temperature
seizures (fits) 
feeling sick
being sick
stiff neck 
changes in vision – such as blurring, greying of vision or double vision (due to the abscess putting pressure on the optic nerve)




when to get medical advice
any symptoms that suggest a problem with the brain and nervous system should be treated as a medical emergency. these include: 

slurred speech 
muscle weakness or paralysis 
seizures occurring in a person with no previous history of seizures 

if you or someone you know experiences any of these symptoms, phone 999 immediately and ask for an ambulance.
any symptoms that suggest a worsening infection, such as a high temperature or being sick, should be reported to your gp immediately. 
if your gp is not available, contact your local out-of-hours service or call nhs 111.



causes of a brain abscess
there are 3 main ways a brain abscess can develop. these are:

an infection in another part of the skull – such as an ear infection, sinusitis or dental abscess, which can spread directly into the brain 
an infection in another part of the body – for example, the infection that causes pneumonia spreading into the brain via the blood 
trauma, such as a severe head injury – that cracks open the skull, allowing bacteria or fungi to enter the brain 

however, in some cases, the source of the infection remains unknown.
read more about the causes of a brain abscess.



diagnosing a brain abscess
if a brain abscess is suspected, an initial assessment will be made based on your symptoms, medical history and whether you've had a recent infection or a weakened immune system.
blood tests can also be carried out to check for an infection.
if you're referred to hospital for further tests, you may have either:

a ct scan – a series of x-rays are used to produce a detailed image of the inside of your body 
an mri scan – which uses strong magnetic fields and radio waves to produce a detailed image of the inside of your body. 

if an abscess is found, a procedure known as ct-guided aspiration may be used to remove a sample of pus for testing. this involves using a ct scan to guide a needle to the site of the abscess.



treating a brain abscess
a brain abscess is regarded as a medical emergency. swelling caused by the abscess can disrupt the blood and oxygen supply to the brain. there's also a risk of the abscess bursting (rupturing). 
if left untreated, a brain abscess can cause permanent brain damage and could be fatal.
a brain abscess is usually treated using a combination of:

medicines – either antibiotics or antifungals 
surgery – either draining the pus through a hole in the skull (simple aspiration) or opening the skull and removing the abscess entirely (craniotomy) 

treatment with antibiotics often begins before a diagnosis is confirmed, to reduce the risk of complications.
read more about treating a brain abscess.



complications of a brain abscess
complications of a brain abscess can include:

a reoccurring abscess – seek immediate medical advice if you think there's even a small chance your abscess has reoccurred; this is more common in people with a weakened immune system or cyanotic heart disease 
brain damage – mild to moderate brain damage often improves with time but severe brain damage is likely to be permanent; brain damage is more of a risk if diagnosis and treatment are delayed 
epilepsy – where a person has repeated seizures (fits) 
meningitis – a life-threatening infection of the protective membranes around the brain, which requires urgent treatment; this is more common in children




      page last reviewed: 20 may 2019
      next review due: 20 may 2022
    





next
:
causes










