


breath-holding in babies and children






breath-holding is when a baby or child stops breathing for up to 1 minute and may faint. it can happen when a child is frightened, upset, angry, or has a sudden shock or pain. it's usually harmless but can be scary for parents, particularly when it happens for the first time.






immediate action required: call 999 for an ambulance if your child:
      





faints and cannot be woken up
is shaking or jerking because of a fit
is blue or grey

these could be symptoms of breath-holding, but could also be related to other, more serious conditions. if a doctor has not previously told you it's breath-holding, it's important to get it checked immediately.




what happens during breath-holding
during breath-holding, your child may:

cry and then be silent while holding their breath
open their mouth as if going to cry but make no sound
turn blue or grey 
be floppy or stiff, or their body may jerk
faint for 1 or 2 minutes

your child may be sleepy or confused for a while afterwards.
breath-holding is usually harmless
although breath-holding can be scary for parents, it's usually harmless and your child should grow out of it by the age of 4 or 5.
breath-holding episodes:

usually last for less than 1 minute (if the child faints, they'll usually regain consciousness within 1 or 2 minutes) 
are not epileptic seizures

your child is not doing it on purpose and cannot control what happens when they have a breath-holding episode.
what to do when a child has a breath-holding episode



do





      stay calm – it should pass in less than 1 minute
    




      lie the child on their side – do not pick them up
    




      stay with them until the episode ends
    




      make sure they cannot hit their head, arms or legs on anything
    




      reassure them and ensure they get plenty of rest afterwards
    



don't






      do not shake your child or splash them with water
    





      do not put anything in their mouth (including your fingers)
    





      do not give them mouth-to-mouth or cpr
    





      do not tell them off (they're not doing it deliberately)
    








non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




your child has already been diagnosed with breath-holding and:

has breath-holding episodes more often than before or the episodes seem worse
is stiff or shakes for longer than a minute and takes a while to recover
has breath-holding episodes that are affecting everyday life

the gp will try to find out if there's a more serious underlying condition. they may suggest an ecg to check your child's heart rhythm.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus





treatments for breath-holding
there's no specific treatment for breath-holding. it should eventually stop by the time your child is 4 or 5 years old.
medicines are rarely used to treat breath-holding.
breath-holding is sometimes related to iron deficiency anaemia.
your child's blood iron levels may be checked. they may need iron supplements if their iron levels are low.


causes of breath-holding
breath-holding is usually triggered by a sudden shock or pain, or strong emotions like fear, upset or anger.
there are 2 types of breath-holding:
blue breath-holding spells
this is the most common type of breath-holding and happens when a child's breathing pattern changes.
reflex anoxic seizures
this type of breath-holding happens when a child's heart rate slows down.



information: 
find out more:

the syncope trust and reflex anoxic seizures (stars) – reflex anoxic seizures





      page last reviewed: 26 november 2019
      next review due: 26 november 2022
    




