


broken ankle






get medical advice as soon as possible if you think you have broken your ankle. it may need treatment to heal properly.
do not worry if you do not know if your ankle is broken, dislocated or sprained. get it checked by a doctor.






urgent advice: call 111 or go to an urgent treatment centre if:
      




you have had an injury and your ankle:

is painful, bruised or swollen
hurts when you put weight on it
feels stiff and is difficult to move

find an urgent treatment centre








immediate action required: call 999 or go to a&e if:
      





your ankle is at an odd angle 
a bone is sticking out of your ankle
you have a bad cut or wound on your ankle
you're in severe pain 
your toes look blue or white, or feel numb




    what we mean by severe pain
    





          severe pain:
      


always there and so bad it’s hard to think or talk
you can’t sleep
it’s very hard to move, get out of bed, go to the bathroom, wash or dress





          moderate pain:
      


always there
makes it hard to concentrate or sleep
you can manage to get up, wash or dress





          mild pain:
      


comes and goes
is annoying but doesn’t stop you doing things like going to work











things to do while you're waiting to see a doctor

do





      raise your ankle if possible 
    




      gently hold an ice pack (or a bag of frozen peas) wrapped in a towel on your ankle for 15 to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 hours
    




      stop any bleeding – put pressure on the wound using a clean cloth or dressing
    




      if your ankle is not at an odd angle, wrap it loosely in a bandage to help support it
    




      remove any jewellery on your ankle or toes
    




      take paracetamol
    



don't






      do not take ibuprofen until you have seen a doctor
    





      do not eat or drink anything in case you need surgery 
    





      do not move or put weight on your ankle if possible
    




treatments for a broken ankle
you'll usually have an x-ray to check if your ankle is broken and see how bad the break is.  
if you have a very minor break, you may not need any treatment.  
for a more serious break, you may need: 

a special boot to help support your ankle
a plaster cast to hold your ankle in place while it heals
the bones to be moved back into place by a doctor (they'll give you an injection to numb your ankle)
surgery to fix the broken bones 

you'll usually have follow-up appointments to check your ankle is healing properly.


how long it takes to recover from a broken ankle
a broken ankle usually takes 6 to 8 weeks to heal, but it can take longer.
the doctor will tell you: 

how long you'll have to wear the boot or have the plaster cast on
how much weight to put on your ankle – you may be given crutches or a walking frame to help keep weight off it

once it's healed, use your ankle as normal. moving it will stop it getting stiff. 
you may need to see a physiotherapist. they can help you with exercises to get your foot and ankle gently moving again. 
ask your doctor when you can return to contact sports or other activities that put a lot of strain on your ankle.


things you can do to help during recovery
it's important to follow any advice you're given by the hospital or fracture clinic.
there are some things you can do to ease pain and help your broken ankle recover.

do





      rest and raise your ankle whenever possible
    




      take paracetamol or the painkiller your doctor has given you to ease pain  
    




      gently move your toes and bend your knee while wearing the boot or cast to ease stiff muscles
    



don't






      do not get your plaster cast wet
    





      do not carry heavy things
    





      do not move your ankle too much
    





      do not use anything to scratch under your cast
    


find out how to take care of your plaster cast






urgent advice: call 111 or go to an urgent treatment centre if:
      





the pain in your ankle gets worse 
your temperature is very high or you feel hot and shivery 
your leg, foot or toes start to feel numb or like they're burning 
your leg, foot or toes look swollen, or turn blue or white
the plaster cast or boot is rubbing, or feels too tight or too loose
there's a bad smell or discharge from under your cast






      page last reviewed: 18 april 2019
      next review due: 18 april 2022
    




