



overview
        
 - 
          bronchiectasis
        



contents


overview


symptoms


causes


diagnosis


treatment


complications









bronchiectasis is a long-term condition where the airways of the lungs become abnormally widened, leading to a build-up of excess mucus that can make the lungs more vulnerable to infection.the most common symptoms of bronchiectasis include:a persistent cough that usually brings up phlegm (sputum)breathlessnessthe severity of symptoms can vary widely. some people have only a few symptoms that do not appear often, while others have wide-ranging daily symptoms.the symptoms tend to get worse if you develop an infection in your lungs.read more about the symptoms of bronchiectasis.

information: 
coronavirus adviceif you have bronchiectasis and you're worried about coronavirus, you can get advice about coronavirus and bronchiectasis from the british lung foundation.




when to see a gpyou should see a gp if you develop a persistent cough. while this may not be caused by bronchiectasis, it requires further investigation.if the gp suspects you may have bronchiectasis, they'll refer you to a specialist in treating lung conditions (a respiratory consultant) for further tests.read more about diagnosing bronchiectasis.



how the lungs are affectedthe lungs are full of tiny branching airways known as bronchi. oxygen travels through these airways, ends up in tiny sacs called alveoli, and from there is absorbed into the bloodstream.the inside walls of the bronchi are coated with sticky mucus, which protects against damage from particles moving down into the lungs.in bronchiectasis, one or more of the bronchi are abnormally widened. this means more mucus than usual gathers there, which makes the bronchi more vulnerable to infection.if an infection does develop, the bronchi may be damaged again, so even more mucus gathers in them and the risk of infection increases further.over time, this cycle can cause gradually worsening damage to the lungs.



why it happensbronchiectasis can develop if the tissue and muscles that surround the bronchi are damaged or destroyed. there are many reasons why this may happen. the 3 most common causes in the uk are:having had a lung infection in the past, such as pneumonia or whooping cough, that damages the bronchiunderlying problems with the immune system (the body's defence against infection) that make the bronchi more vulnerable to damage from an infectionallergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (abpa) – an allergy to a certain type of fungi that can cause the bronchi to become inflamed if spores from the fungi are inhaledbut in many cases, no obvious cause for the condition can be found. this is known as idiopathic bronchiectasis.read more about the causes of bronchiectasis.



who is affectedbronchiectasis is thought to be uncommon. it's estimated around 5 in every 1,000 adults in the uk have the condition.it can affect anyone at any age, but symptoms do not usually develop until middle age.



how bronchiectasis is treatedthe damage caused to the lungs by bronchiectasis is permanent, but treatment can help relieve your symptoms and stop the damage getting worse.the main treatments include:exercises and special devices to help you clear mucus out of your lungsmedicine to help improve airflow within the lungsantibiotics to treat any lung infections that developsurgery is usually only considered for bronchiectasis in rare cases where other treatments have not been effective, the damage to your bronchi is confined to a small area, and you're in good general health.read more about the treatment of bronchiectasis.



possible complicationscomplications of bronchiectasis are rare, but they can be serious.one of the most serious complications is coughing up large amounts of blood, caused by one of the blood vessels in the lungs splitting.this can be life threatening and may require emergency surgery to treat it.read more about the complications of bronchiectasis.



outlookthe outlook for people with bronchiectasis is highly variable and often depends on the underlying cause.living with bronchiectasis can be stressful and frustrating, but most people with the condition have a normal life expectancy.for people with very severe symptoms, however, bronchiectasis can be fatal if the lungs stop working properly.around 1,500 deaths reported in uk each year are thought to be caused by bronchiectasis.



information: 
social care and support guideif you:need help with day-to-day living because of illness or disabilitycare for someone regularly because they're ill, elderly or disabled – including family membersour guide to care and support explains your options and where you can get support.




      page last reviewed: 30 may 2018
      next review due: 30 may 2021
    





next
:
symptoms










