


brucellosis






brucellosis is an infection you can catch from unpasteurised milk and cheese. it's extremely rare in the uk.



how you catch brucellosis
it's mainly caught by: 

drinking milk that has not been pasteurised (heat-treated to kill bacteria) 
eating dairy products, like cheese and ice cream, made from unpasteurised milk

you can also catch it from eating raw or undercooked meat, or from contact with bodily fluids of farm animals such as cows, goats, sheep and pigs. but this is rare.
it's very rare to catch brucellosis from other people.



symptoms of brucellosis
symptoms may appear suddenly over 1 to 2 days or gradually over several weeks.
symptoms of brucellosis are like the flu:

a high temperature of 38c or above
loss of appetite 
sweating
headaches
extreme tiredness
back and joint pain








non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you have symptoms of brucellosis and:
      





you've had unpasteurised milk or dairy products 
you've eaten raw or undercooked meat 
you work closely with farm animals

tell your gp if you have recently travelled overseas.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus






how brucellosis is treated
brucellosis is usually diagnosed using a blood test.
the infection is treated with a course of antibiotics for at least 6 weeks. it's important to finish your course even if you start to feel better.
you should make a full recovery, and the infection is unlikely to return.



how to avoid getting brucellosis
there's no human vaccine against brucellosis, but there are things you can do to reduce your chances of getting it.

do





      avoid contact with livestock and wild animals while travelling in places where brucellosis is a problem
    




      wear protective clothing if working with animals
    




      put a plaster on any wounds before touching animals
    



don't






      do not drink unpasteurised milk
    





      do not eat dairy products, like cheese and ice cream, made from unpasteurised milk
    





      do not eat raw or undercooked meat
    





report suspected brucellosis
brucellosis is a notifiable animal disease. if you suspect you or someone you know has it, you must report it immediately by calling the defra rural services helpline on 03000 200 301.



      page last reviewed: 4 october 2017
      next review due: 4 october 2020
    




