


bunions







bunions are bony lumps that form on the side of the feet. surgery is the only way to get rid of them, but there are things you can do to ease any pain they cause.




check if you have bunions
symptoms of bunions include:



    hard lumps on the sides of your feet, by your big toes.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/93853/view





    your big toe pointing towards your other toes.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/89117/view





    hard, red or swollen skin over the lump.
  

      credit: houin/bsip/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/615340/view


you may also have pain along the side or bottom of your feet. this is usually worse when wearing shoes and walking.





    if you're not sure it's a bunion
    



conditions with similar symptoms to bunions


foot symptoms
possible cause




redness, heat, swelling and pain that comes and goes
gout


aching, swollen and stiff joints; usually worse in the morning
arthritis


pain, bruising and swelling after hurting your toe
broken toe










how to ease bunion pain yourself
you cannot get rid of bunions or stop them getting worse yourself, but there are things you can do to relieve any pain:

do





wear wide shoes with a low heel and soft sole





hold an ice pack (or a bag of frozen peas wrapped in a tea towel) to the bunion for up to 5 minutes at a time





try bunion pads (soft pads you put in shoes to stop them rubbing on a bunion) – you can buy these from pharmacies





take paracetamol or ibuprofen





try to lose weight if you're overweight




don't






do not wear high heels or tight, pointy shoes










non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




the pain has not improved after trying home treatments for a few weeksthe pain is stopping you doing your normal activitiesyour bunions are getting worseyou also have diabetes – foot problems can be more serious if you have diabetes

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus



your gp might refer you to a foot specialist (podiatrist).you could also pay to see a foot specialist privately.






find a podiatrist






treatments for a bunion from a gp or podiatrist
a gp or podiatrist can advise you about:things you can do to ease your symptoms, such as wearing wide shoes that do not squash your toesthings you can buy or have specially made to reduce bunion pain, such as insoles (orthotics), toe spacers and toe supports (splints)a gp may refer you to a surgeon if your bunions are very painful or having a big effect on your life.surgery is not done just to improve how your feet look.



surgery for bunionssurgery is the only way to get rid of bunions.



    what happens during bunion surgery
    


the main operation for bunions is an osteotomy.this involves:making a small cut in the skin over your big toe.cutting or scraping away the bunion.straightening your toe bone.fixing your toe bone in place with metal screws or staples put under your skin. these are often left in permanently.surgery is usually done when you're asleep under general anaesthetic.most people go home the same day.


it can take a while to recover from surgery.you'll usually need to:stay off your feet as much as possible for at least 2 weeksavoid driving for 6 to 8 weeksstay off work for 6 to 12 weeksavoid sports for up to 6 monthsafter the operation:your toes might be weaker or stiffer than beforethey may not be perfectly straightyour feet might still be slightly wide, so you'll probably have to keep wearing wide, comfy shoesbunions sometimes come back after surgery.




you cannot always prevent bunions
the cause of bunions is unknown. it's not clear if you can do anything to prevent them.it might help to:make sure your shoes are the correct size and have enough room for your toesavoid shoes with high heels or pointy toes



      page last reviewed: 14 august 2017
      next review due: 14 august 2020
    




