


cellulitis







cellulitis is a skin infection that's treated with antibiotics. it can be serious if it's not treated quickly.








non-urgent advice:  see a gp if your skin is:
      




red, hot and painful (it may also be swollen and blistered)you can also have swollen, painful glands.these are symptoms of cellulitis.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus



you can get cellulitis on any part of your body, but it usually affects:



    hands – causing swollen fingers.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/252466/view





    feet – sometimes near toes if you have athlete's foot.
  

      credit: science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/608470/view





    legs – usually the lower legs.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/711864/view







    if you're not sure it's cellulitis
    


other conditions can make your skin red, flaky and blistered.it's unlikely to be cellulitis unless part of your skin is hot, red and swollen.








urgent advice: get advice from 111 now if:
      




your face or the area around your eye is affectedyour symptoms are rapidly getting worse – this could be a sign of something more serious like the rare condition necrotising fasciitisyou have a weakened immune system – for example, because of chemotherapy or diabetesa young child or elderly person has possible cellulitisearly treatment with antibiotics can stop the infection becoming more serious.111 will tell you what to do. they can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.



    other ways to get help
    


get an urgent gp appointmenta gp may be able to treat you.ask your gp practice for an urgent appointment.








treatment from a gp
for mild cellulitis affecting a small area of skin, your gp will prescribe antibiotic tablets – usually for a week.your symptoms might get worse in the first 48 hours of treatment, but should then start to improve.you should go back to the gp if you do not start to feel better 2 to 3 days after starting antibiotics.it's important to keep taking antibiotics until they're finished, even when you feel better.most people make a full recovery after 7 to 10 days.if your cellulitis is severe, your gp might refer you to hospital for treatment.


to stop cellulitis recurringsome people with recurring cellulitis might be prescribed low-dose long-term antibiotics to stop infections coming back.




things you can do yourself
as well as taking antibiotics for cellulitis, you can help speed up your recovery by:taking paracetamol or ibuprofen for the painraising the affected body part on a pillow or chair when you're sitting or lying down to reduce swellingregularly moving the joint near the affected body part, such as your wrist or ankle, to stop it getting stiffdrinking plenty of fluids to avoid dehydrationnot wearing compression stockings until you're betteryou can reduce the chances of getting cellulitis again by:keeping skin clean and well moisturisedcleaning any cuts or wounds, or using antiseptic creampreventing cuts and scrapes by wearing appropriate clothing and footwearwearing gloves if working outside



cellulitis complicationsif not treated quickly, the infection can spread to other parts of the body, such as the blood, muscles and bones.




immediate action required: call 999 or go to a&e now if you have cellulitis with:
      




a very high temperature, or you feel hot and shiverya fast heartbeat or fast breathingpurple patches on the skinfeeling dizzy or faintconfusion or disorientationcold, clammy, pale skinunresponsiveness or loss of consciousnessthese are symptoms of sepsis, which can be very serious and potentially life threatening.






what causes cellulitis
cellulitis is usually caused by a bacterial infection.the bacteria can infect the deeper layers of your skin if it's broken – for example, because of an insect bite or cut, or if it's cracked and dry.sometimes the break in the skin is too small to notice.you cannot catch cellulitis from another person as it affects the deeper layers of the skin.you're more at risk of cellulitis if you:have poor circulation in your arms, legs, hands or feet – for example, because you're overweightfind it difficult to move aroundhave a weakened immune system because of chemotherapy treatment or diabeteshave bedsores (pressure ulcers)have lymphoedema, which causes fluid build-up under the skininject drugshave a wound from surgeryhave had cellulitis beforepeople who are more at risk of cellulitis should treat any athlete's foot promptly.



information: 
social care and support guideif you:need help with day-to-day living because of illness or disabilitycare for someone regularly because they're ill, elderly or disabled, including family membersour guide to care and support explains your options and where you can get support.




can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 17 january 2018
      next review due: 17 january 2021
    




