


cervical spondylosis






cervical spondylosis causes neck pain – often in the over 50s. a gp should check more serious cases affecting the spine.



check if it's cervical spondylosis
ageing causes wear and tear to muscles and bones – called cervical spondylosis. 
symptoms include:

neck and shoulder pain or stiffness – that comes and goes
headaches – often starting at the back of the neck




exercise can ease cervical spondylosis symptoms
neck pain can be helped with exercise and by improving your posture.



a pharmacist can help with cervical spondylosis
painkillers like paracetamol and ibuprofen can help ease neck pain and stiffness.
ask your pharmacist if they can recommend stronger painkillers if you need them.






find a pharmacist in your area









non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you have:
      





pain that's getting much worse
lack of co-ordination – for example trouble with tasks like buttoning a shirt 
heaviness or weakness in your arms or legs
pins and needles in an arm as well as pain
problems walking
loss of bladder or bowel control 

these can be signs of a more severe condition (cervical myelopathy) which can cause permanent damage to the spine if left untreated.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus





what happens at your appointment
your gp will examine your neck and shoulder. they might also test your reflexes and watch you walk. 
depending on your symptoms you might be sent for other tests such as x-rays or scans.



treatment from a gp
treatment depends on how bad your symptoms are. 
your gp might give you more exercises to do and recommend you carry out your usual activities as much as possible.
your gp might also prescribe a muscle relaxant or other medicine if the pain has been coming and going for a long time (chronic pain).
it usually takes a few weeks for treatment to work, although the pain and stiffness can come back.
surgery is only considered if:

a nerve is being pinched by a slipped disc or bone (cervical radiculopathy)
there's a problem with your spinal cord (cervical myelopathy)

surgery is not always a cure but it may stop symptoms getting worse.

information: 
physiotherapy for cervical spondylosis
if your symptoms don't improve in a few weeks your gp might prescribe physiotherapy. 
physiotherapy from the nhs may not be available everywhere and waiting times can be long. 
you can also get physiotherapy privately.
find a registered physiotherapist




causes of cervical spondylosis
many people aged over 50 have cervical spondylosis as part of getting older.
you can get cervical spondylosis at any age if you have: 

a job that involves repetitive neck movements or a lot of overhead work – like painting and decorating
previously had a neck injury
a family history of the condition

some people have it without knowing, and without it being a problem.



      page last reviewed: 4 august 2017
      next review due: 4 august 2020
    




