


chilblains






chilblains are small, itchy, red patches that can appear after you have been in the cold. they usually clear up on their own. you may need to see a gp if they do not go away.


check if you have chilblainschilblains usually appear a few hours after you have been in the cold.you mostly get them on your fingers and toes. but you can get them on your face and legs, too.





    your skin can feel itchy or like it's burning
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/108447/view





    your fingers or toes may become red or swollen
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/205880/view




what you can do about chilblainschilblains usually go away on their own in 2 to 3 weeks.there are things you can try to:get rid of them yourselfstop them coming back



do





take paracetamol or ibuprofen to ease the pain





avoid being outside when it's cold or damp





wear warm, waterproof clothing, gloves and thick socks if you do go out when it's cold or damp




don't






do not put your feet or hands on a radiator or under hot water to warm them up






do not smoke or have drinks that have caffeine in them – this can affect the flow of blood in your fingers and toes






do not scratch or pick at your skin





you can ask a pharmacist about:the best painkiller to takecreams that can help to soothe the itchingwhether you need to see a gp






find a pharmacy








non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




your skin has not got any better after 2 to 3 weeksthere is pus coming out of your skinyour temperature is very high or you feel hot or shiveryyou keep getting chilblainsyou have diabetes – foot problems can be more serious if you have diabetes

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus





what happens at your appointmenta gp will check where it hurts to see if you have chilblains.they may need to refer you for further tests with a specialist if they're not sure why you're getting chilblains.rarely, the gp will prescribe a medicine that can help your chilblains clear up.causes of chilblainsyou can get chilblains when it's cold. the cold makes the tiny blood vessels in your fingers and toes get smaller. this stops blood moving around as easily.if you warm up too quickly, the blood vessels get bigger again and blood rushes to your fingers and toes. this can cause pain, redness and swelling.



can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 7 november 2018
      next review due: 7 november 2021
    




