


chiropractic






chiropractic is a treatment where a practitioner called a chiropractor uses their hands to help relieve problems with the bones, muscles and joints.
it's considered a type of complementary and alternative medicine (cam), which means it's not a conventional medical treatment.



uses of chiropractic
chiropractic can mainly help with pain in muscles and joints, such as:

back pain
neck pain
shoulder pain
elbow pain
pain from osteoarthritis

there's little evidence that it can help with more serious conditions or problems not affecting the muscles or joints, such as asthma, allergies and mental health problems.



getting chiropractic on the nhs
chiropractic is not widely available on the nhs, but is provided in some areas.
to find out if you can see a chiropractor on the nhs in your area:

ask your gp 
contact your local clinical commissioning group (ccg)

you might want to consider paying for private treatment if you can't get chiropractic on the nhs where you live or the waiting list is too long.



paying for private chiropractic treatment
most people who have chiropractic treatment pay for it privately. it usually costs around £30 to £80 per session.
you do not need to see your gp before making an appointment, but it's best to speak to them for advice first. they can let you know about other treatments that might help, and can advise you if chiropractic is suitable for you.
if you decide to contact a chiropractor yourself, make sure they're registered with the general chiropractic council (gcc). by law, all chiropractors must be registered with the gcc.
check the gcc register to see if a practitioner is registered and find chiropractors in your area.



what happens during chiropractic treatment
at your first appointment, the chiropractor will assess your symptoms to determine if chiropractic is suitable and what techniques are likely to help.
chiropractors use different techniques to treat problems with the muscles and joints, including:

spinal manipulation – using their hands to apply force to the muscles, bones and joints in and around the spine 
short, sharp thrusting movements 
gradually moving your joints into different positions 
pulling or stretching your muscles in different directions 

treatment is not normally painful, but some people experience a bit of discomfort. tell your chiropractor immediately if you find it painful.



risks and side effects of chiropractic
chiropractic is generally very safe when performed correctly by a trained and registered chiropractor.
some people may experience side effects from treatment, such as:

aches and pains 
stiffness 
tiredness 

these side effects are usually mild and pass in a few days.
there is a risk of more serious problems, such as stroke, from spinal manipulation, but the risk is extremely small. 
speak to a gp if you're unsure whether chiropractic is safe for you.



      page last reviewed: 29 august 2017
      next review due: 29 august 2020
    




