


cold sores







cold sores are common and usually clear up on their own within 10 days. but there are things you can do to help ease the pain.




check if it's a cold sore
a cold sore usually starts with a tingling, itching or burning feeling.over the next 48 hours:



    small fluid-filled blisters appear.
  

      credit: science source/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/257566/view





    the blisters can appear anywhere on the face.
  

      credit: pan xunbin/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/479137/view





    the blisters burst and crust over into a scab.
  

cold sores should start to heal within 10 days, but are contagious and may be irritating or painful while they heal.some people find that certain things trigger a cold sore, such as another illness, sunshine or menstrual periods.





    when it's not a cold sore
    



other possible causes of your symptoms


symptoms
possible cause




painful red spot on the face filled with pus
spot or boil


blister on the inside of the lip or mouth
mouth ulcer


red sores or blisters on the face that become crusty, golden-brown patches
impetigo








how long cold sores are contagiouscold sores are contagious from the moment you first feel tingling or other signs of a cold sore coming on to when the cold sore has completely healed.



a pharmacist can help with cold soresa pharmacist can recommend:creams to ease pain and irritationantiviral creams to speed up healing timecold sore patches to protect the skin while it healsyou can buy electronic devices from pharmacies that treat cold sores with light or lasers.some people find these helpful, but there have not been many studies to confirm if they work.

information: 
if you regularly get cold sores, use antiviral creams as soon as you recognise the early tingling feeling. they do not always work after blisters appear.









find a pharmacy






things you can do yourself
cold sores take time to heal and they're very contagious, especially when the blisters burst.

important
kissing a baby if you have a cold sore can lead to neonatal herpes, which is very dangerous to newborn babies.


do





eat cool, soft foods





wash your hands with soap and water before and after applying cream





avoid anything that triggers your cold sores





use sunblock lip balm (spf 15 or above) if you're outside in the sun





take paracetamol or ibuprofen to ease pain and swelling (liquid paracetamol is available for children) – do not give aspirin to children under 16





drink plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration




don't






do not kiss anyone while you have a cold sore






do not share anything that comes into contact with a cold sore (such as cold sore creams, towels, cutlery or lipstick)






do not have oral sex until your cold sore completely heals as you could give your partner genital herpes






do not touch your cold sore (apart from applying cream) – if you do wash your hands






do not rub cream into the cold sore – dab it on instead






do not eat acidic or salty food if it makes your cold sore feel worse










non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




the cold sore has not started to heal within 10 daysyou're worried about a cold sore or think it's something elsethe cold sore is very large or painfulyou or your child also have swollen, painful gums and sores in the mouth (gingivostomatitis)you have a weakened immune system – for example, because of chemotherapy or diabetes

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







treatment from a gp
a gp may prescribe antiviral tablets if your cold sores are very large, painful or keep coming back.newborn babies, pregnant women and people with a weakened immune system may be referred to hospital for advice or treatment.



why cold sores come backcold sores are caused by a virus called herpes simplex.once you have the virus, it stays in your skin for the rest of your life. sometimes it causes a cold sore.most people are exposed to the virus when they're young after close skin to skin contact, such as kissing, with someone who has a cold sore.it does not usually cause any symptoms until you're older. you will not know if it's in your skin unless you get a cold sore.



can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 20 july 2020
      next review due: 20 july 2023
    




