


colic







colic is when a baby cries a lot but there's no obvious cause. it's a common problem that should get better on its own. but call nhs 111 or see a gp if you're worried.




check if your baby has colic
all babies cry, but your baby may have colic if they cry more than 3 hours a day, 3 days a week for at least 1 week.they may cry more often in the afternoon and evening.it may also be colic if:it's hard to soothe or settle your babythey clench their fiststhey go red in the facethey bring their knees up to their tummy or arch their backtheir tummy rumbles or they're very windyit can start when a baby is a few weeks old. it usually stops by the time they're 6 months old.






    if you're not sure it's colic
    


there are other reasons why your baby may be crying.it could be they:are hungryhave a dirty nappyhave windhave refluxhave constipationif you're not sure what's wrong, it's best to speak to your health visitor, call nhs 111 or see a gp to be sure.






things you can try to soothe your baby
your baby does not usually need to see a doctor if they have colic. speak to your health visitor for advice and support.health visitors and doctors will usually advise you to:hold or cuddle your baby when they're crying a lotsit or hold your baby upright during feeding to stop them swallowing airwind your baby after feedsgently rock your baby over your shouldergently rock your baby in their moses basket or crib, or push them in their prambath your baby in a warm bathhave some gentle white noise like the radio or tv in the background to distract themkeep feeding your baby as usualother things you may hear about include:anti-colic drops and herbal and probiotic supplementschanges to your diet if you're breastfeedingapplying gentle pressure to your baby's spine (spinal manipulation) or skull (cranial osteopathy)but there's very little evidence these things work. speak to your health visitor for further advice.







non-urgent advice:  call nhs 111 or see a gp if:
      




you're worried about your babynothing seems to be workingyou're finding it hard to copeyour baby is older than 4 months and still seems to have symptoms of colica gp will check for possible causes of your baby's crying.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus









immediate action required: go to a&e or call 999 if:
      




your baby has a weak or high-pitched cryyour baby's cry does not sound like their normal cryyou know better than anyone else what your child is usually like. trust your instincts if you think something is seriously wrong, particularly if they have other worrying symptoms.find your nearest a&e





how to cope if you have a colicky babylooking after a colicky baby can be upsetting, but it's usually nothing to worry about and will pass with time.ask for support:from other parents, family or friendsby calling the cry-sis helpline on 0845 122 8669 (9am to 10pm, 7 days a week)from your health visitor, by calling nhs 111 or seeing a gp



causes of colic
it's not known exactly what causes some babies to get colic. but it may be because babies find it harder to digest food when they're young.or they may be crying because they have problems with food allergies, such as a cows' milk allergy.



      page last reviewed: 9 november 2018
      next review due: 9 november 2021
    




