


common cold







coronavirus
if you have a high temperature, a new, continuous cough or a loss or change to your sense of smell or taste, it could be coronavirus (covid-19).get advice about coronavirus symptoms and what to do




you can often treat a cold without seeing a gp. you should begin to feel better in about a week or 2.




check if you have a cold
cold symptoms come on gradually and can include:a blocked or runny nosea sore throatheadachesmuscle achescoughssneezinga raised temperaturepressure in your ears and faceloss of taste and smellthe symptoms are the same in adults and children. sometimes symptoms last longer in children.





    telling the difference between cold and flu
    


cold and flu symptoms are similar, but flu tends to be more severe.

difference between cold and flu


cold
flu




appears gradually
appears quickly within a few hours


affects mainly your nose and throat
affects more than just your nose and throat


makes you feel unwell, but you're ok to carry on as normal (for example, go to work)
makes you feel exhausted and too unwell to carry on as normal










how you can treat a cold yourself
to help you get better more quickly:rest and sleepkeep warmdrink plenty of water (fruit juice or squash mixed with water is ok) to avoid dehydrationgargle salt water to soothe a sore throat




a pharmacist can help with cold medicines
you can buy cough and cold medicines from pharmacies or supermarkets. a pharmacist can advise you on the best medicine.you can:relieve a blocked nose with decongestant sprays or tabletsease aches or lower a temperature with painkillers like paracetamol or ibuprofenbe careful not to use cough and cold medicines if you're taking paracetamol and ibuprofen tablets, as it's easy to take more than the recommended dose.some are not suitable for children, babies and pregnant women.there's little evidence that supplements (such as vitamin c, echinacea or garlic) prevent colds or speed up recovery.



information: 
do not go to a pharmacy if you have a high temperature, a new, continuous cough or a loss or change to your sense of smell or taste, it could be coronavirus. ask someone to go for you if you can.







find a pharmacy









urgent advice: contact nhs 111 if you need medical help
      




if you have a high temperature, a new, continuous cough or a loss or change to your sense of smell or taste, use the 111 online coronavirus serviceif you have any other symptoms and need medical help, use the regular 111 online serviceonly call 111 if you cannot get help online or you need help for a child under 5.


antibioticsgps do not recommend antibiotics for colds because they will not relieve your symptoms or speed up your recovery.antibiotics are only effective against bacterial infections, and colds are caused by viruses.



how to avoid spreading a coldcolds are caused by viruses and easily spread to other people. you're infectious until all your symptoms have gone. this usually takes a week or 2.colds are spread by germs from coughs and sneezes, which can live on hands and surfaces for 24 hours.to reduce the risk of spreading a cold:wash your hands often with warm water and soapuse tissues to trap germs when you cough or sneezebin used tissues as quickly as possible



how to prevent catching a colda person with a cold can start spreading it from a few days before their symptoms begin until the symptoms have finished.the best ways to avoid catching a cold are:washing your hands with warm water and soapnot sharing towels or household items (like cups) with someone who has a coldnot touching your eyes or nose in case you have come into contact with the virus – it can infect the body this waystaying fit and healthythe flu vaccine helps prevent flu but not colds.



    see how to wash your hands correctly
    











    
    media last reviewed: 30 march 2020
    media review due: 30 march 2023
  






can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 19 december 2017
      next review due: 19 december 2020
    




