


conjunctivitis







conjunctivitis is an eye condition caused by infection or allergies. it usually gets better in a couple of weeks without treatment.




check if you have conjunctivitis
conjunctivitis is also known as red or pink eye.it usually affects both eyes and makes them:bloodshotburn or feel grittyproduce pus that sticks to lashesitchwater



    conjunctivitis that produces sticky pus is contagious.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/711964/view





    if eyes are red and feel gritty, the conjunctivitis is also usually contagious.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/694220/view





    conjunctivitis caused by allergies like hay fever makes eyes red and watery but is not contagious.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/633822/view




if you're not sure it's conjunctivitisother conditions can cause red eyes.




how to treat conjunctivitis yourself
there are things you can do to help ease your symptoms.use clean cotton wool (1 piece for each eye). boil water and then let it cool down before you:gently rub your eyelashes to clean off crustshold a cold flannel on your eyes for a few minutes to cool them downdo not wear contact lenses until your eyes are better.




stop infectious conjunctivitis from spreading

do





wash hands regularly with warm soapy water





wash pillows and face cloths in hot water and detergent




don't






do not share towels and pillows






do not rub your eyes



staying away from work or schoolyou do not need to avoid work or school unless you or your child are feeling very unwell.



a pharmacist can help with conjunctivitisspeak to a pharmacist about conjunctivitis. they can give you advice and suggest eyedrops or antihistamines to help with your symptoms.if you need treatment for a child under 2, you'll need a prescription from a gp.






find a pharmacy









non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




your baby has red eyes – get an urgent appointment if your baby is less than 28 days oldyou wear contact lenses and have conjunctivitis symptoms as well as spots on your eyelids – you might be allergic to the lensesyour symptoms have not cleared up after 2 weeks

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







urgent advice: get advice from 111 now if you have:
      




pain in your eyessensitivity to lightchanges in your vision, like wavy lines or flashingintense redness in 1 eye or both eyesa baby less than 28 days old with red eyesthese can be signs of a more serious eye problem.111 will tell you what to do. they can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.



    other ways to get help
    


get an urgent gp appointmenta gp may be able to help you.ask your gp practice for an urgent appointment.








treatment from a gp
treatment will depend on the cause of your conjunctivitis.if it's a bacterial infection you might be prescribed antibiotics. but these will not work if it's caused by a virus (viral conjunctivitis) or an allergy.some sexually transmitted infections (stis) can cause conjunctivitis. this type takes longer to clear up.



can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 9 january 2018
      next review due: 9 january 2021
    




