



overview
        
 - 
          coronary heart disease
        



contents


overview


symptoms


causes


diagnosis


treatment


recovery


prevention










coronary heart disease (chd) is a major cause of death in the uk and worldwide. chd is sometimes called ischaemic heart disease or coronary artery disease.

information: 
coronavirus adviceif you have heart disease and you're worried about coronavirus, you can get advice about coronavirus and heart disease from the british heart foundation.





symptoms of coronary heart disease (chd)
the main symptoms of chd are:chest pain (angina)heart attacksheart failureyou can also have other symptoms, such as heart palpitations and unusual breathlessness.but not everyone has the same symptoms and some people may not have any before chd is diagnosed.




causes of coronary heart disease (chd)
coronary heart disease is the term that describes what happens when your heart's blood supply is blocked or interrupted by a build-up of fatty substances in the coronary arteries.over time, the walls of your arteries can become furred up with fatty deposits. this process is known as atherosclerosis and the fatty deposits are called atheroma.atherosclerosis can be caused by lifestyle factors, such as smoking and regularly drinking excessive amounts of alcohol.you're also more at risk of getting atherosclerosis if you have conditions like high cholesterol, high blood pressure (hypertension) or diabetes.



diagnosing coronary heart disease (chd)if a doctor feels you're at risk of chd, they may carry out a risk assessment.they'll ask you about your medical and family history and your lifestyle, and they'll take a blood test.further tests may be needed to confirm chd, including:a treadmill testa radionuclide scana ct scanan mri scancoronary angiographyread more about how coronary heart disease is diagnosed.




treating coronary heart disease (chd)
coronary heart disease cannot be cured but treatment can help manage the symptoms and reduce the chances of problems such as heart attacks.treatment can include:lifestyle changes, such as regular exercise and stopping smokingmedicinesangioplasty – where balloons and stents are used to treat narrow heart arteriessurgery



recovering from the effects of coronary heart disease (chd)if you've had a heart attack, an angioplasty, or heart surgery, it's possible to get back to a normal life.advice and support is available to help you deal with aspects of your life that may have been affected by chd.read more about recovering from the effects of coronary heart disease.




preventing coronary heart disease (chd)
you can reduce your risk of getting chd by making some simple lifestyle changes.these include:eating a healthy, balanced dietbeing physically activegiving up smokingcontrolling blood cholesterol and sugar levelskeeping your heart healthy will also have other health benefits, such as helping reduce your risk of stroke and dementia.



the heartthe heart is a muscle about the size of your fist. it pumps blood around your body and beats approximately 70 times a minute.after the blood leaves the right side of the heart, it goes to your lungs where it picks up oxygen.the oxygen-rich blood returns to your heart and is then pumped to the body's organs through a network of arteries.the blood returns to your heart through veins before being pumped back to your lungs again. this process is called circulation.the heart gets its own supply of blood from a network of blood vessels on the heart's surface called coronary arteries.












    
    media last reviewed: 14 may 2020
    media review due: 14 may 2023
  




      page last reviewed: 10 march 2020
      next review due: 10 march 2023
    





next
:
symptoms










