


cough






a cough will usually clear up on its own within 3 to 4 weeks.



coronavirus
a new, continuous cough could be coronavirus (covid-19).get advice about coronavirus symptoms and what to do




how you can treat a cough yourselfthere's usually no need to see a gp.you should:restdrink plenty of fluidsyou could also try:hot lemon and honey (not suitable for babies under 1 year old)a herbal medicine called pelargonium (suitable for people aged 12 or over)there's limited evidence to show these work.



    how to make a hot lemon and honey drink
    


squeeze half a lemon into a mug of boiled water.add 1 to 2 teaspoons of honey.drink while still warm (do not give hot drinks to small children).


hot lemon with honey has a similar effect to cough medicines.



you can ask a pharmacist about:cough syrupcough medicine (some cough medicines should not be given to children under 12)cough sweetsthese will not stop your cough, but will help you cough less.decongestants and cough medicines containing codeine will not stop your cough.

information: 
do not go to a pharmacy if you have a new, continuous cough, it could be coronavirus. ask someone to go for you if you can.







find a pharmacy








urgent advice: contact nhs 111 if you need medical help
      




if you have a high temperature, a new, continuous cough or a loss or change to your sense of smell or taste, use the 111 online coronavirus serviceif you have any other symptoms and need medical help, use the regular 111 online serviceonly call 111 if you cannot get help online or you need help for a child under 5.




what happens at your appointmentto find out what's causing your cough, your gp might:take a sample of any mucus you might be coughing uporder an x-ray, allergy test, or a test to see how well your lungs workrefer you to hospital to see a specialist, but this is very rare



important
antibiotics are not normally prescribed for coughs.your gp will only prescribe them if you need them – for example, if you have a bacterial infection or you're at risk of complications.




what causes coughsmost coughs are caused by a cold or flu.other causes include:smokingheartburn (acid reflux)allergies – for example, hay feverinfections like bronchitismucus dripping down the throat from the back of the nosea cough is very rarely a sign of something serious like lung cancer.












    
    media last reviewed: 14 may 2018
    media review due: 9 may 2021
  




can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 18 december 2017
      next review due: 18 december 2020
    




