


craniosynostosis






craniosynostosis is a rare condition where a baby's skull doesn't grow properly and their head becomes an unusual shape. it doesn't always need to be treated, but surgery can help if it's severe.



is my baby's head a normal shape?
babies' heads come in all shapes and sizes. it's normal for their head to be a slightly unusual shape. it will often get better as they grow.
but your baby may have a problem like craniosynostosis if: 

their head is long and narrow – like a rugby ball
their forehead is pointy or triangular
1 side of their head is flattened or bulging out
the soft spot on the top of their head (fontanelle) disappears before they're 1 year old
their head seems small compared with their body

if the problem is very mild, it may not be noticeable until your child is older.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you're worried about the shape of your baby's or child's head
      




they can check if it could be craniosynostosis or a common problem in babies called flat head syndrome. this isn't serious and usually gets better by itself.
ask for an urgent appointment if your child also has:

constant headaches
problems with their vision – like blurred or double vision
a decline in their school performance

these problems can occur in young children with mild craniosynostosis if their skull puts pressure on their brain.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus



what happens at your gp appointment
your gp will examine your child's head. they may also take some measurements to see if it's an unusual size for your child's age.
if they think it could be craniosynostosis, they may refer you to a specialist centre for more tests, like x-rays or scans.

information: 
there are 4 specialist nhs centres for craniosynostosis:

alder hey children's hospital in liverpool
birmingham children's hospital
great ormond street hospital in london
john radcliffe hospital in oxford


staff at the centre can check if your child does have craniosynostosis, what type it is and if it might need to be treated.



    types of craniosynostosis
    






type
what it means




sagittal synostosis
affects the top of the head, causing it to become long and narrow


coronal synostosis
affects the side of the head, causing the forehead to be flattened on one side


metopic synostosis
affects the forehead, causing it to become pointy or triangular


lambdoid synostosis
affects the back of the head, causing it to become flattened on 1 side


syndromic synostosis
affects more than one part of the head and can affect other parts of the body; caused by an underlying genetic condition (syndrome)




the charity headlines has more information about the main syndromes linked to syndromic synostosis.





treatment for craniosynostosis
craniosynostosis doesn't always need to be treated. your child may just have regular check-ups to monitor it.
surgery may be recommended if:

it's severe – this could affect how your child's brain grows or lead to problems like low self-esteem as they get older 
your child has symptoms caused by pressure on their brain, such as headaches
it's also affecting their face and causing problems like breathing difficulties

surgery usually involves making a cut across the top of your child's head, removing and reshaping the affected parts of their skull, and then fixing them back in place.
it's done under general anaesthetic (they're asleep). your child may need to stay in hospital for up to a week afterwards.



long-lasting effects of craniosynostosis
most children don't have any lasting health problems. they may have a scar across the top of their head if they had surgery, but this will be hidden by their hair.
your child will have regular check-ups to see how they're doing. these may be every few weeks at first but will become less frequent as they get older.
if your child has severe craniosynostosis, surgery can't always fully correct the shape of their head and they may need ongoing care.

information: 
the charity headlines can provide more information and support for people with craniosynostosis and their families.




      page last reviewed: 18 october 2017
      next review due: 18 october 2020
    




