


dandruff






dandruff is a common skin condition. it's not harmful and you cannot catch it.
check if it's dandruff



    dandruff causes white or grey flakes of skin to appear on the scalp and in the hair
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/256156/view


the flakes are often more noticeable in darker hair and  if they fall from your scalp on to your shoulders.
your scalp may also feel dry and itchy.



how to treat dandruff yourself
use an anti-dandruff shampoo. there are several different types you can buy from pharmacies or supermarkets.
look for shampoo containing one of these ingredients:

zinc pyrithione 
salicylic acid 
selenium sulphide (or selenium sulfide) 
ketoconazole 
coal tar 

your pharmacist can tell you how to use the shampoo.
use the shampoo for a month to see if your dandruff improves. you might need to try more than one type to find one that works for you.






find a pharmacy








non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      





you still have symptoms after using anti-dandruff shampoo for a month
your dandruff is bad or your scalp is very itchy
your scalp is red or swollen

the gp can check your scalp for skin conditions that could be causing your dandruff.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus






causes of dandruff
dandruff is not caused by poor hygiene, although it may be more obvious if you do not wash your hair regularly. 
stress and cold weather may also make dandruff worse.

a list of conditions that cause dandruff and the main symptoms


symptoms
possible causes




scaly, itchy and red patches on skin on scalp, face and other areas of the body
seborrheic dermatitis


red or silver rash on scalp, sometimes with patchy hair loss
tinea capitis, known as ringworm


dry, red, flaky and very itchy skin on areas of the body
eczema


red, inflamed (irritated) skin; may also have blisters and cracked skin – reaction to products such as hair dye, sprays, gels or mousses
contact dermatitis


red, flaky, crusty and sore patches of skin covered with silvery scales
psoriasis


greasy, yellowish crusts on baby's scalp,  eyebrows and nappy area
cradle cap





information: 
do not worry if you're not sure what is causing your dandruff. follow the advice on this page and see a gp if things do not improve in a month.




      page last reviewed: 2 october 2019
      next review due: 2 october 2022
    




