


earache







earache and ear pain is common, particularly in young children. it can be painful, but is not usually a sign of anything serious.



how long earache lastsit depends on what's causing it. most earaches in children are caused by an ear infection, which usually start to improve after a few days.




spotting earache in babies and young children
a young child might have earache if they:rub or pull their eardo not react to some soundshave a temperature of 38c or aboveare irritable or restlessare off their foodkeep losing their balanceearache and ear pain can affect 1 or both ears.




how to treat earache yourself
there are some things you can do to help relieve earache and ear pain.

do





use painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen (children under 16 should not take aspirin)





place a warm or cold flannel on the ear




don't






do not put anything inside your ear, such as cotton buds






do not try to remove earwax






do not let water get inside your ear







a pharmacist can help with earaches
a pharmacist might be able to tell you:what you can do to treat earache yourselfif you can buy anything to help (for example, eardrops)if you need to see a gp








find your nearest pharmacy









non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you or your child:
      




have earache for more than 3 dayskeep getting earache

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







urgent advice: get an urgent gp appointment if:
      




you or your child have earache and:become generally unwella very high temperature or feel hot and shiveryswelling around the earfluid coming from the earhearing loss or a change in hearingsomething stuck in the earyour child is under 2 and has earache in both earscall 111 for advice if you cannot get an urgent appointment.






what causes earache and pain
earache and pain can be caused by many things, but sometimes it's not known by what.here are some of the most common causes:

a table showing possible causes of earache symptoms.


symptoms
possible condition




ear pain with toothache
children teething, dental abscess


ear pain with change in hearing
glue ear, earwax build-up, an object stuck in the ear (do not try to remove it yourself – see a gp), perforated eardrum (particularly after a loud noise or accident)


ear pain with pain when swallowing
sore throat, tonsillitis, quinsy (a complication of tonsillitis)


ear pain with a fever
ear infection, flu, cold







can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 6 august 2019
      next review due: 6 august 2022
    




