


earwax build-up







earwax normally just falls out on its own. when it's blocking your ears, a pharmacist can help.




how you can treat earwax build-up yourself

important
do not use your fingers or any objects like cotton buds to remove earwax. this will push it in and make it worse.

earwax usually falls out on its own. if it does not and blocks your ear, put 2 to 3 drops of olive or almond oil in your ear twice a day for a few days.over 2 weeks lumps of earwax should fall out of your ear, especially at night when you're lying down.there's no evidence that ear candles or ear vacuums get rid of earwax.




a pharmacist can help with earwax build-up
speak to a pharmacist about earwax build-up. they can give advice and suggest treatments.they might recommend chemical drops to dissolve the earwax. the earwax should fall out on its own or dissolve after about a week.do not use drops if you have a hole in your eardrum (a perforated eardrum).








find a pharmacy









non-urgent advice:  see a nurse at your gp practice if:
      




your ear hasn't cleared after 5 daysyour ear is badly blocked and you can't hear anything (you can get an infection if it isn't cleared)

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus



not all gp practices remove earwaxsome can:flush the wax out with water (ear irrigation)suck the wax out (microsuction)these treatments are usually painless. you might have to pay to have them done privately.



preventing earwax build-upyou can't prevent earwax. it's there to protect your ears from dirt and germs.but you can keep using eardrops to soften the wax. this will help it fall out on its own and should prevent blocked ears.



causes of earwaxyou might have earwax build-up because:you just have more wax in your ears – some people do naturallyyou have hairy or narrow canals (the tubes that link the eardrum and outer ear)of your age – wax gets harder and more difficult to fall outof hearing aids, earplugs and other things you put in your ear – these can push the wax further in




how to tell if your ear is blocked with earwax
you can have:earachedifficulty hearingitchinessdizzinessan ear infectionsounds such as high-pitched tones coming from inside the ear (tinnitus)once the earwax is removed, these symptoms usually improve. if they do not, see the nurse at your gp practice.



can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 21 december 2017
      next review due: 21 december 2020
    




