


elbow and arm pain






elbow and arm pain is not usually a sign of anything serious. if it does not go away after a few weeks, see a gp.



how you can ease elbow and arm pain yourself
try these things for a couple of days: 

put a pack of frozen peas wrapped in a tea towel on your arm – do this for 5 minutes, 3 times a day
take painkillers like paracetamol or ibuprofen
raise the arm if it's swollen








non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      





the pain does not go away after a few weeks


information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







urgent advice: get advice from 111 now if your arm:
      





hurts when you exercise but the pain goes away when you rest 
is swollen and you have a very high temperature or feel hot and shivery
is extremely painful and difficult to move
tingles or feels numb 
has been injured and you heard a snapping noise or your arm has changed shape 

these can be signs of a heart problem (angina), an infection or a broken arm.
111 will tell you what to do. they can tell you the right place to get help if you need to see someone.
go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.



    other ways to get help
    


go to an urgent treatment centre
urgent treatment centres are places you can go if you need to see someone now.
they're also called walk-in centres or minor injuries units.
you may be seen quicker than you would at a&e.
find an urgent treatment centre








immediate action required: call 999 if:
      





the pain has come on suddenly and your chest feels like it's being squeezed

these could be signs of a heart attack or stroke.





causes of elbow and arm pain
apart from an injury, these things can cause arm pain.
do not self-diagnose. see a gp if you're worried. 




main symptoms
possible cause




pain, stiffness, difficulty moving, swelling
tendonitis (for example, tennis elbow)


pain, tenderness, bruising, swelling
sprains and strains


pain, stiffness coming down from the shoulder
frozen shoulder


pain and stiffness in the joints
arthritis


temperature of 38c or above, feeling shivery, skin broken around the shoulder
inflamed shoulder (bursitis)







      page last reviewed: 18 december 2017
      next review due: 18 december 2020
    




