



overview
        
 - 
          falls
        



contents


overview


prevention









anyone can have a fall, but older people are more vulnerable and likely to fall, especially if they have a long-term health condition.
falls are a common, but often overlooked, cause of injury. around 1 in 3 adults over 65 who live at home will have at least one fall a year, and about half of these will have more frequent falls. 
most falls do not result in serious injury. but there's always a risk that a fall could lead to broken bones, and it can cause the person to lose confidence, become withdrawn, and feel as if they have lost their independence.



what should i do if i fall?
if you have a fall, it's important to keep calm. if you're not hurt and you feel strong enough to get up, don't get up quickly. 
roll on to your hands and knees and look for a stable piece of furniture, such as a chair or bed. 
hold on to the furniture with both hands to support yourself and, when you feel ready, slowly get up. sit down and rest for a while before carrying on with your daily activities. 
if you're hurt or unable to get up, try to get someone's attention by calling out for help, banging on the wall or floor, or using your aid call button (if you have one). if possible, crawl to a telephone and dial 999 to ask for an ambulance.
try to reach something warm, such as a blanket or dressing gown, to put over you, particularly your legs and feet. 
stay as comfortable as possible and try to change your position at least once every half an hour or so.
if you're living with or caring for an elderly person, see what to do after an incident for more information and advice.



what causes a fall?
the natural ageing process means that older people have an increased risk of having a fall. 
in the uk, falls are the most common cause of injury related deaths in people over the age of 75. 
older people are more likely to have a fall because they may have:

balance problems and muscle weakness  
poor vision
a long-term health condition, such as heart disease, dementia or low blood pressure (hypotension), which can lead to dizziness and a brief loss of consciousness

a fall is also more likely to happen if:

floors are wet, such as in the bathroom, or recently polished 
the lighting in the room is dim 
rugs or carpets are not properly secured 
the person reaches for storage areas, such as a cupboard, or is going down stairs 
the person is rushing to get to the toilet during the day or at night 

another common cause of falls, particularly among older men, is falling from a ladder while carrying out home maintenance work.
in older people, falls can be particularly problematic because osteoporosis is a fairly common problem. 
it can develop in both men and women, particularly in people who smoke, drink excessive amounts of alcohol, take steroid medication, or have a family history of hip fractures.
but older women are most at risk because osteoporosis is often associated with the hormonal changes that occur during the menopause.



preventing a fall
there are several simple measures that can help prevent falls in the home. 
for example:

using non-slip mats in the bathroom 
mopping up spills to prevent wet, slippery floors
ensuring all rooms, passages and staircases are well lit
removing clutter
getting help lifting or moving items that are heavy or difficult to lift 

the charity age uk has more advice about how to make tasks easier around the home.
healthcare professionals take falls in older people very seriously because of the huge consequences they can have for the health and wellbeing of this group. 
as a result, there's a great deal of help and support available for older people, and it's worth asking your gp about the various options.
your gp may carry out some simple tests to check your balance. they can also review any medicines you're taking in case their side effects may increase your risk of falling.
your gp may also recommend:

having a sight test if you're having problems with your vision, even if you already wear glasses 
having an ecg and checking your blood pressure while lying and standing  
requesting a home hazard assessment, where a healthcare professional visits your home to identify potential hazards and give advice 
doing exercises to improve your strength and balance (read about exercise for older adults)

read more about preventing falls.



information: 
social care and support guide
if you:

need help with day-to-day living because of illness or disability
care for someone regularly because they're ill, elderly or disabled - including family members

our guide to care and support explains your options and where you can get support.




      page last reviewed: 24 april 2018
      next review due: 24 april 2021
    





next
:
prevention










