


feeling sick (nausea)






feeling sick (nausea) is common and usually goes away on its own. there are some things you can try that might help.



things that may help you stop feeling sick

do





get plenty of fresh air





distract yourself – for example, listen to music or watch a film





take sips of a cold drink – some people find fizzy drinks best





drink ginger or peppermint tea





eat foods containing ginger – such as ginger biscuits





eat smaller, more frequent meals




don't






do not eat or cook strong-smelling food






do not eat hot, fried or greasy food






do not eat too quickly






do not have a large drink with meals






do not lie down soon after eating






do not wear clothes that are tight around your waist or tummy






important
if you're also being sick (vomiting), you could become dehydrated. see what to do if you're vomiting.








non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you:
      




do not feel better in a few daysoften feel sick (it keeps coming back)the gp can look for the cause and suggest treatments.they may prescribe anti-sickness medicine if needed.call 111 for advice if you cannot see a gp.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus









immediate action required: call 999 if you suddenly feel sick and have:
      




chest pain that feels tight or heavypain that spreads to your arms, back, neck or jawshortness of breaththis could be a heart attack.





common causes of feeling sicklots of things can make you feel sick.any other symptoms you have may give you an idea of the cause. but do not self-diagnose – see a gp if you're worried.

a table of possible causes of symptoms.


other symptoms
possible cause




diarrhoea or vomiting
norovirus or food poisoning


headache and a high temperature
an infection, such as flu


heartburn or bloating after eating
acid reflux


headache and sensitivity to light or sound
migraine


dizziness
labyrinthitis or vertigo




other reasons for feeling sick include:pregnancy (morning sickness)motion sicknessanxietyalcoholmedicinesrecent surgery



information: 
do not worry if you're not sure what the cause is. try the things that may stop you feeling sick and see a gp if you do not feel better in a few days.




can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 3 may 2018
      next review due: 3 may 2021
    




