


gastritis







gastritis occurs when the lining of the stomach becomes inflamed after it's been damaged. it's a common condition with a wide range of causes.for most people, gastritis is not serious and improves quickly if treated. but if not, it can last for years.




symptoms of gastritis
many people with gastritis caused by a bacterial infection do not have any symptoms.in other cases, gastritis can cause:indigestiongnawing or burning stomach painfeeling and being sickfeeling full after eatingif the stomach lining has been worn away (erosive gastritis) and exposed to stomach acid, symptoms may include pain, bleeding or a stomach ulcer.the symptoms of gastritis may come on suddenly and severely (acute gastritis) or last a long time (chronic gastritis).



when to see a gpif you have indigestion and stomach pain, you can try treating this yourself with changes to your diet and lifestyle, or with medicines you can get from a pharmacy, such as antacids.see a gp if:you have indigestion symptoms lasting a week or longer, or it's causing you severe pain or discomfortyou think it's brought on by medicine you have been prescribedyou're vomiting blood or have blood in your poo (your poo may appear black)stomach ache and abdominal pain are not always a sign of gastritis.the pain could be caused by a wide range of other things, from trapped wind to irritable bowel syndrome (ibs).



diagnosing gastritisa gp may recommend 1 or more of the following tests:a stool test – to check for infection or bleeding from the stomacha breath test for helicobacter pylori (h. pylori) infection – this involves drinking a glass of clear, tasteless liquid that contains radioactive carbon and blowing into a bagan endoscopy – a flexible tube (endoscope) is passed down your throat and into your oesophagus and stomach to look for signs of inflammationa barium swallow – you're given some barium solution, which shows up clearly on x-rays as it passes through your digestive system




possible causes of gastritis
gastritis is usually caused by 1 of the following:an h. pylori bacterial infectionexcessive use of cocaine or alcoholsmokingregularly taking aspirin, ibuprofen or other painkillers classed as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids)a stressful event – such as a bad injury or critical illness, or major surgeryless commonly, an autoimmune reaction – when the immune system mistakenly attacks the body's own cells and tissues (in this case, the stomach lining)h. pylori gastritismany people become infected with h. pylori bacteria and do not realise it. these stomach infections are common and do not usually cause symptoms.but an h. pylori infection can sometimes cause recurring bouts of indigestion, as the bacteria can cause inflammation of the stomach lining.this sort of gastritis is more common in older age groups and is usually the cause of chronic (persistent) non-erosive cases.an h. pylori stomach infection is usually lifelong, unless it's treated with eradication therapy.




treating gastritis
treatment aims to reduce the amount of acid in the stomach to relieve symptoms, allowing the stomach lining to heal and to tackle any underlying cause.you may be able to treat gastritis yourself, depending on the cause.easing symptomsantacids – these over-the-counter medicines neutralise the acid in your stomach, which can provide rapid pain reliefhistamine 2 (h2) blockers – these medicines decrease acid production and are available to buy from your pharmacist and on prescriptionproton pump inhibitors (ppis), such as omeprazole – these medicines decrease acid production even more effectively than h2 blockerssome low-dose ppis can be bought from your pharmacist without a prescription.you'll need a prescription from a gp for stronger doses.treating h. pylori infectionif an h. pylori infection is the cause of your gastritis, you'll need to take a course of antibiotics alongside a proton pump inhibitor.



things you can do to ease gastritis
if you think the cause of your gastritis is repeated use of nsaid painkillers, try switching to a different painkiller that's not in the nsaid class, such as paracetamol.you may want to talk to a gp about this.also consider:eating smaller, more frequent mealsavoiding foods that can irritate the stomach, such as spicy, acidic or fried foodsavoiding or cutting down on alcoholquitting smoking if you smokemanaging stress



possible complications of gastritisgastritis that lasts for a long time can increase your risk of developing:a stomach ulcerpolyps (small growths) in your stomachtumours in your stomach, which may or may not be cancerous



gastritis or gastroenteritis?gastroenteritis is inflammation (irritation) of the stomach and bowel, caused by an infection.gastritis is inflammation of the stomach lining specifically, and not always caused by infection.



      page last reviewed: 20 may 2019
      next review due: 20 may 2022
    




