


glandular fever







glandular fever mostly affects teenagers and young adults. it gets better without treatment, but it can make you feel very ill and last for weeks.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you have:
      




a very high temperature or you feel hot and shiverya severe sore throatswelling either side of your neck – swollen glandsextreme tiredness or exhaustiontonsillitis that is not getting betterthese are glandular fever symptoms.you do not usually get glandular fever more than once.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus










urgent advice: get advice from 111 now if you have:
      




difficulty swallowingdifficulty breathingextreme tummy pain111 will tell you what to do. they can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.



    other ways to get help
    


get an urgent gp appointmenta gp may be able to help you.ask your gp practice for an urgent appointment.






what happens at your appointmentyour gp might order a blood test to confirm it's glandular fever and to rule out other illnesses, like tonsillitis. this would test for the epstein-barr virus, which causes glandular fever.antibioticsyour gp will not give you antibiotics. glandular fever is caused by a virus so antibiotics will not work.




how to treat glandular fever yourself









    
    media last reviewed: 1 june 2020
    media review due: 1 june 2023
  

there is no cure for glandular fever, it gets better by itself.

do





rest and sleep





drink plenty of fluids (to avoid dehydration)





take painkillers like paracetamol or ibuprofen (do not give aspirin to children under 16)




don't






do not drink alcohol – your liver might be weak while you have glandular fever






how long glandular fever lastsyou should feel better within 2 to 3 weeks. some people might feel extremely tired for months.try to gradually increase your activity when your energy starts to come back.glandular fever can cause your spleen to swell. for the first month, avoid sports or activities that might increase your risk of falling, as this may damage your spleen.




how to stop glandular fever spreading
glandular fever is very infectious. it's spread through spit. you're infectious for up to 7 weeks before you get symptoms.you can go back to school or work as soon as you start to feel better.to prevent glandular fever spreading:

do





wash hands regularly





wash bedding and clothes that may have spit on them




don't






do not kiss others (glandular fever is known as the kissing disease)






do not share cups, cutlery or towels






glandular fever complicationsmost people get better with no problems. sometimes glandular fever may lead to other illnesses, such as:lower level of blood cells, such as anaemiaan infection, such as pneumoniaa neurological illness, such as guillain-barré syndrome or bell's palsy



can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 17 november 2017
      next review due: 17 november 2020
    




