


glue ear







glue ear is where the empty middle part of the ear canal fills up with fluid. this can cause temporary hearing loss. it usually clears up within 3 months, but see a gp about any hearing problems.




check if it's glue ear
the most common symptom of glue ear is temporary hearing loss. it can affect both ears at the same time.other symptoms may include:earache or ear painhearing sounds like ringing or buzzing (tinnitus)glue ear is much more common in children, but adults with glue ear have the same symptoms.





    other conditions that cause ear pain
    



conditions that can cause ear pain


symptoms
possible condition




ear pain with a change in hearing
earwax build-up, an object stuck in the ear (do not try to remove it yourself – see a gp), perforated eardrum (particularly after a loud noise or accident)


ear pain with toothache
children teething, dental abscess


ear pain with pain when swallowing
sore throat, tonsillitis


ear pain with a fever
ear infection, flu, cold













non-urgent advice:  see a gp if your child has hearing problems
      




your child may be struggling to hear if they often:speak loudlyare difficult to understandask people to repeat what they sayask for the tv or music to be turned up loudstruggle to hear people far awaybecome easily distracted when people are talkingseem tired and irritable because it's harder to listen

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus





what happens at your appointmentthe gp should be able to tell if it's glue ear by looking for fluid inside the ear.they'll use a small scope with a light and magnifying glass. this should not be painful.if your child has had glue ear for more than 3 months, they may be referred to a specialist for hearing tests.hearing tests can help find out how severe any hearing loss is and what's causing it.




treatment for glue ear from a gp
glue ear is not always treated. the gp will usually wait to see if the symptoms get better on their own.this is because there's no effective medicine for glue ear, and it often clears up on its own within 3 months.your child may be monitored for up to a year in case their symptoms change or get worse.the gp may suggest trying a treatment called autoinflation while waiting for symptoms to improve. autoinflation can help fluid in the ear to drain.it's done by either:blowing up a special balloon using 1 nostril at a timeswallowing while holding the nostrils closedas autoinflation has to be done several times a day, it's not usually recommended for children under 3 years old.antibiotics may be prescribed if glue ear causes an ear infection.



hospital treatment for glue earyour child may be referred to a specialist in hospital if:glue ear symptoms are affecting their learning and developmentthey already had severe hearing loss before glue earthey have down's syndrome or a cleft lip and palate, as glue ear is less likely to get better by itselfthe 2 main treatments are temporary hearing aids or grommets (small tubes implanted in the ear).occasionally, surgery may be recommended to remove some glands at the back of the nose (adenoids). this is known as an adenoidectomy.the specialist in hospital will help you decide on the best treatment option.grommets for treating glue eara grommet is a small tube that's placed in your child's ear during surgery. it drains fluid away and keeps the eardrum open.the grommet should fall out naturally within 6 to 12 months as your child's ear gets better.if your child needs grommets, you might find these links useful:great ormond street hospital (gosh): treatment of glue ear with grommetsnational deaf children's society (ndcs): harvey gets grommets












    
    media last reviewed: 14 april 2018
    media review due: 14 april 2021
  




      page last reviewed: 28 july 2020
      next review due: 28 july 2023
    




