


gout







gout causes sudden severe joint pain. see a gp for treatment to help during an attack and to stop further attacks.








non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you have:
      




sudden severe pain in any joint – usually the big toe, or fingers, wrists, elbows or kneesred, hot, swollen skin over the affected jointthese are symptoms of gout.gout does not cause lasting damage to joints if you get treatment straight away.ask for an urgent appointment or call 111 if:the pain is getting much worse and you have a very high temperature (you feel hot and shivery)this could mean you have an infection inside the joint.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus





what happens at your appointmentgout can be hard to diagnose as symptoms are similar to other conditions.a gp may ask about your diet and if you drink beer or spirits.you might be sent for a blood test, ultrasound or x-ray.sometimes a thin needle is used to take a sample of fluid from the affected joint to test.the tests will find out how much of a chemical called uric acid there is in your body.having too much can lead to crystals forming around your joints and causing pain.




treatment to reduce pain and swelling
attacks of gout are usually treated with anti-inflammatory medicine like ibuprofen.if the gout does not improve after 3 to 4 days, you might be given steroids as tablets or an injection.

do





take any medicine you have been prescribed as soon as possible – it should start to work within 3 days





rest and raise the limb





keep the joint cool – apply an ice pack, or a bag of frozen peas wrapped in a towel, for up to 20 minutes at a time





drink lots of water (unless advised not to by a gp)





try to keep bedclothes off the affected joint at night




don't






do not knock the joint or put pressure on it



treatment to prevent gout coming backgout can come back every few months or years. it can come back more often if not treated.if you have frequent attacks or you have high levels of uric acid in your blood, you may need uric acid-lowering medicine.

important
it's important to take uric acid-lowering medicine regularly, even when you no longer have symptoms.





things you can do to stop gout coming back
making lifestyle changes might mean you can stop or reduce further attacks.

do





get to a healthy weight, but avoid crash diets – you could try the nhs weight loss plan





aim for a healthy, balanced diet, with plenty of vegetables and some low-fat dairy foods





have at least 2 alcohol-free days a week





drink plenty of fluids to avoid getting dehydrated





exercise regularly – but avoid intense exercise or putting lots of pressure on joints





stop smoking





ask a gp about vitamin c supplements




don't






do not eat a lot of red meat, kidneys, liver or seafood






do not have lots of sugary drinks and snacks






do not have lots of fatty foods






do not drink more than 14 units of alcohol a week (and do not have it all on 1 or 2 days)





the uk gout society has more detailed advice on diet for people living with gout (pdf, 879kb).



things that can trigger a gout attackyou might get an attack if you're very stressed or have had an illness.if you injure or bruise a joint and it's more painful than you'd expect after a minor bump, it could be an attack coming on.get treatment straight away if you feel an attack coming on.



who gets goutgout sometimes runs in families.it's more common in men, especially as they get older.other people at risk include:women after the menopausepeople who take medicines such as diuretics (water tablets) for blood pressure, or have high levels of cholesterolpeople who are overweight and who drink alcohol, especially beer



complications of goutit's rare to get lots of attacks, but if you do, you can develop permanent damage to the joint (chronic gout).chronic gout can also cause tiny white lumps (tophi) to appear under your skin, especially on your ears, fingers or elbows.this is where urate crystals form under the skin. they can be painful.you can get kidney stones if your uric acid levels are very high, so you'll need treatment to reduce the levels.



information: 
social care and support guideif you:need help with day-to-day living because of illness or disabilitycare for someone regularly because they're ill, elderly or disabled (including family members)our guide to care and support explains your options and where you can get support.













    
    media last reviewed: 29 november 2017
    media review due: 29 november 2020
  




can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 24 august 2017
      next review due: 24 august 2020
    




