


hair loss






losing your hair isn't usually anything to be worried about, but it can be upsetting. treatment may help with some types of hair loss.



causes of hair loss
it's normal to lose hair. we can lose between 50 and 100 hairs a day, often without noticing. 
hair loss isn't usually anything to be worried about, but occasionally it can be a sign of a medical condition.
some types of hair loss are permanent, like male and female pattern baldness. this type of hair loss usually runs in the family.
other types of hair loss may be temporary. they can be caused by:

an illness
stress
cancer treatment
weight loss
iron deficiency








non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      





you have sudden hair loss 
you develop bald patches
you're losing hair in clumps 
your head also itches and burns 
you're worried about your hair loss


information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus



what happens at your appointment
your gp should be able to tell you what's causing your hair loss by looking at your hair.
tell your gp if your hair loss is affecting your wellbeing, and ask what treatments are available.

important
see your gp first to get a clear and accurate idea of what's causing your hair loss before thinking about going to a commercial hair clinic, which can be expensive.




treatment for hair loss
most hair loss doesn't need treatment and is either:

temporary and it'll grow back
a normal part of getting older

hair loss caused by a medical condition usually stops or grows back once you have recovered.
there are things you can try if your hair loss is causing you distress. but most treatments aren't available on the nhs, so you'll have to pay for them. 
no treatment is 100% effective.
finasteride and minoxidil
finasteride and minoxidil are the main treatments for male pattern baldness.
minoxidil can also be used to treat female pattern baldness. women shouldn't use finasteride.
these treatments:

don't work for everyone
only work for as long as they're used
aren't available on the nhs
can be expensive

wigs
some wigs are available on the nhs, but you may have to pay unless you qualify for financial help.
synthetic wigs:

last 6 to 9 months 
are easier to look after than real-hair wigs 
can be itchy and hot
cost less than real-hair wigs

real-hair wigs:

last 3 to 4 years
are harder to look after than synthetic wigs 
look more natural than synthetic wigs 
cost more than synthetic wigs

find out more about nhs wigs and costs
other hair loss treatments




treatment
description




steroid injection
injections given into bald patches


steroid creams
cream applied to bald patches


immunotherapy
chemical applied to bald patches


light treatment
shining ultraviolet light on bald patches


tattooing
tattoo used to look like short hair and eyebrows


hair transplant
hair cells are moved to thinning patches


scalp reduction surgery
sections of scalp with hair are stretched and stitched together


artificial hair transplant
surgery to implant artificial hairs




some of these treatments may not be available on the nhs.
find out more about cancer and hair loss
emotional help
losing hair can be upsetting. for many people, hair is an important part of who they are.
if your hair loss is causing you distress, your gp may be able to help you get some counselling.
you may also benefit from joining a support group, or speaking to other people in the same situation on online forums.
try these online support groups:

alopecia uk
alopecia awareness




      page last reviewed: 4 january 2018
      next review due: 4 january 2021
    




