


tension-type headaches







a tension-type headache is the most common type of headache and the one we think of as a normal everyday headache.



symptoms of tension-type headaches
it may feel like a constant ache that affects both sides of the head. you may also feel the neck muscles tighten and a feeling of pressure behind the eyes.a tension headache normally is not severe enough to prevent you doing everyday activities.it usually lasts for 30 minutes to several hours, but can last for several days.



who gets tension headaches?most people are likely to have experienced a tension headache at some point.they can develop at any age, but are more common in teenagers and adults.women tend to suffer from them more commonly than men.some adults experience tension-type headaches more than 15 times a month for at least 3 months in a row.this is known as having chronic tension-type headaches.



when to seek medical helpthere's usually no need to see a gp if you only get occasional headaches.but see a gp if you get headaches several times a week or they're severe.they'll ask questions about your headaches, family history, diet and lifestyle to help diagnose the type of headache you have.you should seek immediate medical advice for headaches that:come on suddenly and are unlike anything you have had beforeare accompanied by a very stiff neck, fever, nausea, vomiting and confusionfollow an accident, especially if it involved a blow to your headare accompanied by weakness, numbness, slurred speech or confusionthese symptoms suggest there could be a more serious problem, which may require further investigation and emergency treatment.




what causes tension headaches?
the exact cause of tension-type headaches is not clear, but certain things have been known to trigger them.these include:stress and anxietysquintingpoor posturetirednessdehydrationmissing mealslack of physical activitybright sunlightnoisecertain smellstension-type headaches are known as primary headaches, which means they're not caused by an underlying condition. other primary headaches include cluster headaches and migraines.




how are tension headaches treated?
tension-type headaches are not life threatening and are usually relieved by painkillers or lifestyle changes.lifestyle changesrelaxation techniques can often help with stress-related headaches.this may include:yogamassageexerciseapplying a cool flannel to your forehead or a warm flannel to the back of your neckpainkillerspainkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen can be used to help relieve pain. aspirin may also sometimes be recommended.if you're taking these medicines, you should always follow the instructions on the packet.paracetamol is usually the best choice if you're pregnant. do not take ibuprofen during pregnancy without speaking to a gp, midwife or pharmacist first.children under 16 should not be given aspirin.medicine should not be taken for more than a few days at a time.medicines containing codeine, such as co-codamol, should be avoided unless recommended by a gp.


painkiller headachestaking painkillers over a long period (usually 10 days or more) may lead to medicine-overuse headaches developing.your body can get used to the medicine and a headache can develop if you stop taking them. if a gp suspects your headache is caused by the persistent use of medicines, they may ask you to stop taking it.but you should not stop taking your medicine without first consulting a gp.



preventing tension headachesif you experience frequent tension-type headaches, you may wish to keep a diary to try to identify what could be triggering them.it may then be possible to alter your diet or lifestyle to prevent them occurring as often.regular exercise and relaxation are also important measures to help reduce stress and tension that may be causing headaches.maintaining good posture and ensuring you're well rested and hydrated can also help.guidelines from the national institute for health and care excellence (nice) state that a course of up to 10 sessions of acupuncture over a 5- to 8-week period may be beneficial in preventing chronic tension-type headaches.in some cases, an antidepressant medication called amitriptyline may be prescribed to help prevent chronic tension-type headaches, although there's limited evidence of its effectiveness.this medicine does not treat a headache instantly, but must be taken daily for several months until the headaches lessen.



      page last reviewed: 16 july 2018
      next review due: 16 july 2021
    




