


headaches






most headaches will go away on their own and are not a sign of something more serious.



how you can ease headaches yourself
headaches can last between 30 minutes and several hours.

do





      drink plenty of water
    




      get plenty of rest if you have a cold or the flu
    




      try to relax – stress can make headaches worse
    




      exercise when you can
    




      take paracetamol or ibuprofen
    



don't






      do not drink alcohol
    





      do not skip meals (even if you might not feel like eating anything)
    





      do not sleep more than you usually would – it can make the headache worse
    





      do not strain your eyes for a long time – for example, by looking at a screen
    









non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      





your headache keeps coming back
painkillers do not help and your headache gets worse
you have a bad throbbing pain at the front or side of your head – this could be a migraine or, more rarely, a cluster headache
you feel sick, vomit and find light or noise painful
you get other symptoms – for example, your arms or legs feel numb or weak


information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







urgent advice: get advice from 111 now if you have a severe headache and:
      





your jaw hurts when eating
blurred or double vision
your scalp feels sore

these could be signs that the arteries in your head and neck are inflamed. this needs urgent treatment.
111 will tell you what to do. they can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.
go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.



    other ways to get help
    


get an urgent gp appointment
a gp may be able to treat you.
ask your gp practice for an urgent appointment.








immediate action required: call 999 or go to a&e if:
      





you injured your head badly – for example, from a fall or accident
the headache came on suddenly and is extremely painful

you have an extremely painful headache and:

sudden problems speaking or remembering things
loss of vision
you're feeling drowsy or confused
you have a very high temperature, feel hot and shivery, and have a stiff neck or a rash
the white part of your eye is red






what can cause headaches
the most common reasons are: 

having a cold or the flu
stress
drinking too much alcohol
bad posture
eyesight problems
not eating regular meals
not drinking enough fluids (dehydration) 
taking too many painkillers
women having their period or menopause




      page last reviewed: 21 december 2017
      next review due: 21 december 2020
    




