


heartburn and acid reflux







heartburn is a burning feeling in the chest caused by stomach acid travelling up towards the throat (acid reflux). if it keeps happening, it's called gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (gord).




check if you have acid reflux
the main symptoms of acid reflux are:heartburn – a burning sensation in the middle of your chestan unpleasant sour taste in your mouth, caused by stomach acidyou may also have:a cough or hiccups that keep coming backa hoarse voicebad breathbloating and feeling sickyour symptoms will probably be worse after eating, when lying down and when bending over.




causes of heartburn and acid reflux
lots of people get heartburn from time to time. there's often no obvious reason why.sometimes it's caused or made worse by:certain food and drink – such as coffee, alcohol, chocolate and fatty or spicy foodsbeing overweightsmokingpregnancystress and anxietysome medicines, such as anti-inflammatory painkillers (like ibuprofen)a hiatus hernia – when part of your stomach moves up into your chest




how you can ease heartburn and acid reflux yourself
simple lifestyle changes can help stop or reduce heartburn.

do





eat smaller, more frequent meals





raise 1 end of your bed 10 to 20cm by putting something under your bed or mattress – make it so your chest and head are above the level of your waist, so stomach acid does not travel up towards your throat





try to lose weight if you're overweight





try to find ways to relax




don't






do not have food or drink that triggers your symptoms






do not eat within 3 or 4 hours before bed






do not wear clothes that are tight around your waist






do not smoke






do not drink too much alcohol






do not stop taking any prescribed medicine without speaking to a doctor first






a pharmacist can help with heartburn and acid refluxspeak to a pharmacist for advice if you keep getting heartburn.they can recommend medicines called antacids that can help ease your symptoms.it's best to take these with food or soon after eating, as this is when you're most likely to get heartburn. they may also work for longer if taken with food.






find a pharmacy









non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




lifestyle changes and pharmacy medicines are not helpingyou have heartburn most days for 3 weeks or moreyou have other symptoms, like food getting stuck in your throat, frequently being sick or losing weight for no reasona gp can provide stronger treatments and help rule out any more serious possible causes of your symptoms.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







treatment from a gp
to ease symptoms of acid reflux, a gp may prescribe medicine that reduces how much acid your stomach makes, such as:omeprazolelansoprazoleyou may be prescribed 1 of these medicines for a month or 2 to see if your symptoms stop.

important
go back to your gp if your symptoms come back after stopping your medicine. you may need a long-term prescription.

tests and surgery for heartburn and acid refluxif medicines do not help or your symptoms are severe, a gp may refer you to a specialist for:tests to find out what's causing your symptoms, such as a gastroscopy (where a thin tube with a camera is passed down your throat)an operation to stop acid reflux – called a laparoscopic fundoplication



can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 24 august 2017
      next review due: 24 august 2020
    




