


impetigo







impetigo is a skin infection that's very contagious but not usually serious. it often gets better in 7 to 10 days if you get treatment. anyone can get it, but it's very common in young children.




check if you have impetigo
impetigo starts with red sores or blisters. they quickly burst and leave crusty, golden-brown patches.these can:look a bit like cornflakes stuck to your skinget biggerspread to other parts of your bodybe itchysometimes be painful



    sores (non-bullous impetigo) or blisters (bullous impetigo) can start anywhere – but usually on exposed areas like your face and hands.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/258826/view





    it's also common for blisters to start around your tummy.
  

      credit: science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/520717/view





    the sores or blisters burst and form crusty patches.
  

      credit: ism/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/690527/view







    if you're not sure it's impetigo
    


impetigo can look similar to other skin conditions.

a table possible causes of symptoms.


skin symptoms
possible cause




blisters on lips or around the mouth
cold sores


itchy, dry, cracked, sore
eczema


itchy blisters
shingles, chickenpox













non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you or your child:
      




might have impetigohad treatment for impetigo but the symptoms change or get worsehad impetigo before and it keeps coming backimpetigo is very infectious. check with the gp before you go in to the practice. they may suggest a phone consultation.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







treatment for impetigo from a gp
a gp will check it's not something more serious, like cellulitis.if it's impetigo, they can prescribe antibiotic cream to speed up your recovery or antibiotic tablets if it's very bad.

important
do not stop using the antibiotic cream or tablets early, even if the impetigo starts to clear up.

if your impetigo keeps coming backa gp can take a swab from around your nose to check for the bacteria that causes impetigo.they might prescribe an antiseptic nasal cream to try to clear the bacteria and stop the impetigo coming back.




stop impetigo spreading or getting worse
impetigo can easily spread to other parts of your body or to other people until it stops being contagious.it stops being contagious:48 hours after you start using the medicine your gp prescribedwhen the patches dry out and crust over (if you do not get treatment)you can do some things to help stop it spreading or getting worse while it's still contagious:

do





stay away from school or work





keep sores, blisters and crusty patches clean and dry





cover them with loose clothing or gauze bandages





wash your hands frequently





wash your flannels, sheets and towels at a high temperature





wash or wipe down toys with detergent and warm water if your children have impetigo




don't






do not touch or scratch sores, blisters or crusty patches – this also helps stop scarring






do not have close contact with children or people with diabetes or a weakened immune system (if they're having chemotherapy, for example)






do not share flannels, sheets or towels






do not prepare food for other people






do not go to the gym






do not play contact sports like football







how to avoid impetigo
impetigo usually infects skin that's already damaged.avoid infection by:keeping cuts, scratches and insect bites clean – for example, by washing with warm water and soapgetting treatment for skin conditions, like eczema



can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 11 january 2018
      next review due: 11 january 2021
    




