


indigestion







most people have indigestion at some point. usually, it's not a sign of anything more serious and you can treat it yourself.




how to tell if you have indigestion (dyspepsia)
you can have the following symptoms after eating or drinking:heartburn – a painful burning feeling in the chest, often after eatingfeeling full and bloatedfeeling sickbelching and fartingbringing up food or bitter-tasting fluids into your mouth


when it's not indigestionstomach ache or back pain are usually not symptoms of indigestion. if you have those you might be constipated.indigestion, heartburn and acid reflux – what's the difference?heartburn and acid reflux are the same thing – when acid from your stomach comes up your throat. you'll have a burning feeling when this happens. this can be a symptom of indigestion.




how you can treat indigestion yourself
there's usually no need to see a gp about indigestion. there are some things you can do at home.

do





cut down on tea, coffee, cola or alcohol





prop your head and shoulders up in bed – this can stop stomach acid coming up while you sleep





lose weight if you're overweight




don't






eat 3 to 4 hours before going to bed






have rich, spicy or fatty foods






take ibuprofen or aspirin – this can make indigestion worse






smoke







a pharmacist can help with indigestion
a pharmacist can recommend medicines to ease the burning feeling or pain that can come with indigestion.medicines that help reduce acid in your stomach include:antacidsproton pump inhibitorssome indigestion medicines are best to take after eating as their effects last longer. check the information leaflet that comes with the medicines for more information.








find a pharmacy





pregnant women: treating indigestionpregnant women often get indigestion. it's very common from 27 weeks onwards.it can be caused by hormonal changes and the growing baby pressing against the stomach.a pharmacist can help with uncomfortable feelings or pain. they can recommend the best medicines to use when you're pregnant.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you:
      




keep getting indigestionare in severe painare 55 or olderhave lost a lot of weight without meaning tohave difficulty swallowing (dysphagia)keep being sickhave iron deficiency anaemiafeel like you have a lump in your stomachhave bloody vomit or poothese symptoms can be a sign of something more serious.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







what causes indigestion
the acid in your stomach can irritate the stomach lining or your throat. this causes indigestion and gives you a burning feeling and pain.other things that can cause indigestion include:medicinessmokingalcohola type of bacterial infection called helicobacter pyloristress can make indigestion worse.





    illnesses that can cause indigestion
    


hiatus herniastomach ulcerstomach cancerhelicobacter pylori infectionsgastro-oesophageal disease (gord)





can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 21 may 2020
      next review due: 21 may 2023
    




