


ingrown toenail







an ingrown toenail is a common problem where the nail grows into the toe. it can be painful, but there are things you can do to ease the pain.



check if you have an ingrown toenail
you usually get an ingrown toenail on your big toe. but you can get them on any toe.



    your toe may be red, painful and swollen.
  

      credit: ism/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/520431/view





    your toenail may curve into your toe.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/266548/view


your toe can also get infected.signs of an infected toe include:pus coming out of ityou feel hot or shivery



how to treat an ingrown toenail at home
if you go to a gp, they'll usually suggest you try these things first.

do





soak your foot in warm water 3 to 4 times a day for a few days – this softens the skin around your toe and stops the nail growing into it





keep your foot dry for the rest of the day





wear wide, comfortable shoes or sandals





take paracetamol or ibuprofen to ease the pain




don't






do not cut your toenail – leave it to grow out






do not pick at your toe or toenail






do not wear tight, pointy shoes





you can ask a pharmacist about:treatments to help ease the pain and prevent an infectionwhether you need to see a gp






find a pharmacy








non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




treating it at home is not helpingyour toe is very painful and swollen with pus coming out of ityour temperature is very high or you feel hot or shiveryyou have diabetes – foot problems can be more serious if you have diabetes

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus






treatments for an ingrown toenail
a gp can:check your toe to see if it's an ingrown toenailgive you antibiotics if your toenail is infectedif you have a badly ingrown toenail, they may refer you to a foot specialist.treatment from a foot specialista foot specialist (podiatrist) may offer further treatments, such as:cutting away part of the nailremoving the whole nailyou'll have an injection of local anaesthetic to numb your toe when this is done.referral to a podiatrist on the nhs may not be available to everyone and waiting times can be long. you can pay to see a podiatrist privately.








find a podiatrist




how to prevent ingrown toenailsto help stop ingrown toenails:do not cut your toenails too shortcut straight across the nail, not the edgesdo not wear shoes that are too tight or do not fit properly



      page last reviewed: 22 october 2018
      next review due: 22 october 2021
    




