



overview
        
 - 
          kawasaki disease
        



contents


overview


symptoms


causes


diagnosis


treatment


complications









kawasaki disease is a condition that mainly affects children under the age of 5. it's also known as mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome.the characteristic symptoms are a high temperature that lasts for 5 days or more, with:a rashswollen glands in the neckdry, cracked lipsred fingers or toesred eyesafter a few weeks, and with the correct treatment, the symptoms become less severe, but it can take longer than this in some children.read more about the symptoms of kawasaki disease.



coronavirus
at the moment it can be hard to know what to do if your child is unwell. it's important to trust your instincts and get medical help if you need it.




when to see your gpsee your gp urgently, or call 111 if you can't speak to a gp, if your child is unwell and has the above symptoms.if your baby is less than 6 months old, it's even more important to see your gp or call 111 straight away.the symptoms of kawasaki disease can be similar to those of other conditions that cause a fever in children.kawasaki disease can't be prevented. children can make a full recovery within 6 to 8 weeks if it's diagnosed and treated promptly, but complications can develop.it's important to see a gp and start treatment as soon as possible.read more about diagnosing kawasaki disease.it's not clear exactly what causes kawasaki disease. it may be due to a combination of factors.read more about the possible causes of kawasaki disease.



treating kawasaki diseasekawasaki disease is always treated in hospital.it's best if treatment begins as soon as possible. the sooner treatment starts, the quicker the recovery time and there's less risk of complications developing.intravenous immunoglobulin (ivig), a solution of antibodies, and aspirin are the 2 main medicines used to treat kawasaki disease.read more about treating kawasaki disease.



complications of kawasaki diseasekawasaki disease causes the blood vessels to become inflamed and swollen, which can lead to complications in the blood vessels that supply blood to the heart (coronary arteries).around 25% of children with kawasaki disease experience complications with their heart.if the condition goes untreated, complications can be fatal in about 2 to 3% of cases.because of this, the condition has become the leading cause of acquired heart disease (heart disease that develops after birth) in the uk.read more about the complications of kawasaki disease.



who's affectedaround 8 in every 100,000 children develop kawasaki disease in the uk each year.research carried out in england from 1998 to 2003 found 72% of children with kawasaki disease were under the age of 5.the condition was also shown to be 1.5 times more common in boys than girls.



supportthe kawasaki support group and societi, the uk foundation for kawasaki disease can provide you with additional information and advice about your child's condition.



      page last reviewed: 26 july 2018
      next review due: 26 july 2021
    





next
:
symptoms










