


leg cramps







leg cramps are very common and usually harmless. they can happen at any time, but most people have them at night or when resting.




check if it's leg cramps
leg cramps happen when a muscle suddenly shortens and becomes tight (spasms).they can be very painful and make it hard for you to move. the cramps can last from a few seconds to 10 minutes.they can affect the:calf muscle, below the knee at the back of the legmuscles in the feet or the thighs (less often)after the cramp has stopped, the muscle might feel tender for up to 24 hours.




things you can do about leg cramps yourself
during a crampmost cramps go away without you doing anything, but stretching and massaging the muscle can help to ease the pain.paracetamol or ibuprofen will not help when cramp is happening as they take too long to work. they can help to ease muscle tenderness afterwards.preventing crampsregular calf-stretching exercises might not completely prevent cramps, but may help to reduce them.





    how to stretch calf muscles
    


stand facing a wall, arm's length away, with your feet flat on the floor.lean forward, pressing your hands against the wall until you feel your calf muscles stretch. hold for 2 or 3 seconds.stand up straight again.repeat a few times for 5 minutes, 3 times a day (the last time just before bed).if the number of cramps reduces, you might only need to do the exercise once or twice a day.









non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




leg cramps are disturbing your sleepyou also have numbness or swelling in your legsask for an urgent appointment if you have cramps and:they last longer than 10 minutesthere's a chance you might have got a tetanus infection from a wound

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







treatment for leg cramps from a gp
your gp will examine you to try to find out the reason for your cramps.they'll suggest a treatment depending on the cause.this might be:stretching exercisesquinine tablets if your cramps are very bad and exercise has not helpedquinine is not suitable for everyone. your gp will discuss potential risks and side effects with you.




causes of leg cramps
cramps can sometimes be caused by:ageingexercise – putting too much strain on musclespregnancy – usually in the later stagemedicine for lowering cholesterol (statins) or high blood pressure (diuretics)not drinking enough fluid (dehydration)liver disease – because of too much alcoholthe reason for some cramps is unknown.



      page last reviewed: 17 november 2017
      next review due: 17 november 2020
    




