


lichen sclerosus







lichen sclerosus is a skin condition that causes itchy white patches on the genitals or other parts of the body. there's no cure, but treatment can help relieve the symptoms.




check if you have lichen sclerosus
lichen sclerosus affects people of all ages, including children. but it's much more common in women over 50.it causes patches on the skin that are usually:itchywhitesmooth or crinkledeasily damaged – they may bleed or hurt if rubbed or scratchedthe patches can appear anywhere, but most often are on the:area around the opening of the vagina (vulva) and anus – in girls and womenforeskin and end of the penis – in boys and men





    see what lichen sclerosus looks like on the vulva and anus
    





    lichen sclerosus patch on the vulva.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/152743/view





    a large patch around the anus.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/429743/view











non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you have:
      




an itchy white patch on your genitals or skinbeen diagnosed with lichen sclerosus and treatment is not helpingbeen diagnosed with lichen sclerosus and have pain when going to the toilet or having sexyour gp may refer you to a specialist for tests and treatment.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







treatment for lichen sclerosus
lichen sclerosus cannot be cured, but prescription steroid cream usually helps relieve the symptoms.you may need to use the cream regularly for a few months to get your symptoms under control.if your symptoms keep coming back, you may have to keep using it every now and again.you can get more cream from a gp if you need it.




things you can do to help with lichen sclerosus
to help stop your skin becoming irritated or damaged:

do





wash with emollient soap substitutes instead of regular soap – ask a doctor or pharmacist about suitable products





gently dab your genitals dry after peeing





regularly apply a barrier cream or ointment, such as petroleum jelly, to affected areas





wear cotton or silk underwear





use vaginal lubricant if sex is uncomfortable




don't






do not scratch or rub the affected skin






do not wear tight or restrictive clothes – women may find it helps to wear stockings rather than tights






do not wash your underwear with detergent – just use water






problems caused by lichen sclerosusalthough treatment can help, skin affected by lichen sclerosus can sometimes become scarred and tight over time.this can cause discomfort when peeing, pooing, having sex or getting an erection.if it's severe, you might need a small operation, such as surgery to widen your vagina or remove your foreskin (circumcision).



important
cancer and lichen sclerosuslichen sclerosus also increases your risk of getting cancer on your vulva or penis.the risk is low, but it's a good idea to check yourself regularly and see a gp if you're worried.symptoms to look for include a lump or ulcer that does not go away.read about vulval cancer and penile cancer.





causes of lichen sclerosus
the cause of lichen sclerosus is unknown.it might be caused by your immune system, the body's defence against infection, mistakenly attacking and damaging your skin.lichen sclerosus is not:contagious – you cannot spread it to other peoplecaused by poor personal hygiene



      page last reviewed: 1 june 2018
      next review due: 1 june 2021
    




