


liver disease






there are many different types of liver disease. you can help prevent some of them by maintaining a healthy weight and staying within the recommended alcohol limits, if you drink.



types of liver diseasesome of the most common types of liver disease include:

table showing the most common types of liver disease and the possible causes


condition
possible causes




alcohol-related liver disease
regularly drinking too much alcohol


non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
being very overweight (obese) – this may cause fat to build up in the liver


hepatitis
catching a viral infection, regularly drinking too much alcohol


haemochromatosis
a gene that runs in families and may be passed from parents to children


primary biliary cirrhosis
may be caused by a problem with the immune system





information: 
coronavirus adviceget advice about coronavirus and liver disease from the british liver trust




symptoms of liver diseasemost types of liver disease don't cause any symptoms in the early stages.once you start to get symptoms of liver disease, your liver is already damaged and scarred. this is known as cirrhosis.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you have symptoms of cirrhosis, such as:
      




feeling very tired and weak all the timeloss of appetite – which may lead to weight lossloss of sex drive (libido)yellow skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice)other symptoms may include itchy skin, or feeling or being sick.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus




information: 
if you or your child has been diagnosed with liver disease, the british liver trust or children's liver disease foundation can also offer advice and support.




how to prevent liver diseasethe three main causes of liver disease are:obesityan undiagnosed hepatitis infectionalcohol misuseyou can reduce your risk of many types of liver disease with some simple lifestyle changes:try to maintain a healthy weight for your height – try the bmi healthy weight calculator or read about losing weightavoid drinking too much alcohol – read some tips on cutting downthere are vaccines available for two types of hepatitis. these are recommended if you're at risk. read about:who should have the hepatitis a vaccinationwho should have the hepatitis b vaccination

important
you don't have to be an alcoholic to risk damaging your health by drinking. regularly drinking just over the recommended levels can be harmful.read about the risks of drinking too much.




      page last reviewed: 9 october 2017
      next review due: 9 october 2020
    




