


low white blood cell count






a low white blood cell count usually means your body isn't making enough white blood cells. it can increase your risk of all sorts of infections.



what causes a low white blood cell count?
common causes include: 

cancer treatment, like radiotherapy
anti-psychotic drugs
medication for an overactive thyroid
some cancers, like leukaemia
infections such as hiv or hepatitis 
autoimmune disorders, like rheumatoid arthritis

some groups, such as people of afro-caribbean and middle eastern descent, often have a low white blood cell count but this is normal and doesn't increase their risk of infections.
"agranulocytosis" and "neutropenia" are common conditions that cause a low white blood cell count.



treating a low white blood cell count
a blood test can tell you if your white blood cell count is low.
your treatment will depend on what is causing your condition and will often include antibiotics.
you may also need specific treatment:

to boost your white blood cells
if you've got an infection

signs of an infection may include:

high temperature of 38c or above
chills and shivering
sore throat 
mouth sores that keep returning
toothache
skin rashes
tiredness
flu-like symptoms

occasionally, infections can lead to a life-threatening condition called sepsis.







non-urgent advice:  see your gp if:
      





you know you're at risk of a low white blood cell count and you get an infection
you keep getting infections


information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus






things you can do yourself to avoid infections
if you have a low white blood cell count caused by illness or medication you should take steps to avoid infections.

do





      avoid close contact with people who are sick
    




      store and prepare food properly to avoid food poisoning
    




      wash your hands with soap and warm water regularly
    




      use an electric shaver instead of a razor
    




      avoid shared hot tubs
    



don't






      do not share food, cups, utensils, toothbrushes or make-up
    





      do not eat raw foods, like meat, shellfish and eggs
    





      do not change cat litter or handle animal poo
    





      do not change nappies
    





      do not walk outside barefoot
    





      do not swim in ponds and rivers
    





      page last reviewed: 26 september 2017
      next review due: 26 september 2020
    




