


lyme disease







lyme disease is a bacterial infection that can be spread to humans by infected ticks. it's usually easier to treat if it's diagnosed early.




symptoms of lyme disease
many people with early symptoms of lyme disease develop a circular red skin rash around a tick bite.the rash can appear up to 3 months after being bitten by a tick and usually lasts for several weeks.most rashes appear within the first 4 weeks.



    the rash is often described as looking like a bull's-eye on a dartboard.
  

      credit: cdc/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/95650/view





    the skin will be red and the edges may feel slightly raised.
  

      credit: larry mulvehill/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/259371/view


not everyone with lyme disease gets the rash. some people also have flu-like symptoms in the early stages, such as:a high temperature, or feeling hot and shiveryheadachesmuscle and joint paintiredness and loss of energy





    other symptoms of lyme disease
    


some people with lyme disease develop more severe symptoms months or years later.this is more likely if treatment is delayed.these more severe symptoms may include:pain and swelling in jointsnerve problems – such as pain or numbnessheart problemstrouble with memory or concentration





most tick bites are harmlessonly a small number of ticks are infected with the bacteria that cause lyme disease.a tick bite can only cause lyme disease in humans if the tick has already bitten an infected animal.but it's still important to be aware of ticks and to safely remove them as soon as possible, just in case.ticks that may cause lyme disease are found all over the uk, but high-risk areas include grassy and wooded areas in southern england and the scottish highlands.





    what are ticks?
    





      credit: sinclair stammers/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/263611/view


ticks are tiny spider-like creatures that live in woods and areas with long grass. they're found all over the uk.ticks do not jump or fly. they attach to the skin of animals or humans that brush past them.once a tick bites into the skin, it feeds on blood for a few days before dropping off.





how to spot and remove ticks

important
tick bites are not always painful. you may not notice a tick unless you see it on your skin.regularly check your skin and your children's or pets' skin after being outdoors.

to remove a tick safely:use fine-tipped tweezers or a tick-removal tool. you can buy these from some pharmacies, vets and pet shops.grasp the tick as close to the skin as possible.slowly pull upwards, taking care not to squeeze or crush the tick. dispose of it when you have removed it.clean the bite with antiseptic or soap and water.the risk of getting ill is low. you do not need to do anything else unless you become unwell.



    how to remove a tick safely.
  

      credit: shotshop gmbh / alamy stock photo
image no longer available for purchase but license expires: 09th may 2028









non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




you have been bitten by a tick or visited an area in the past month where infected ticks are foundand you get:flu-like symptoms – such as feeling hot and shivery, headaches, aching muscles or feeling sick, ora circular red rashtell them if you have been in forests or grassy areas.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus





what happens at your appointmentyour gp will ask about your symptoms and consider any rash or recent tick bites you know about.lyme disease can be difficult to diagnose. it has similar symptoms to other conditions and there's not always an obvious rash.two types of blood test are available to help confirm or rule out lyme disease. but these tests are not always accurate in the early stages of the disease.you may need to be retested if you still have lyme disease symptoms after a negative result.




treatment from a gp
if your gp thinks you might have lyme disease, they'll prescribe a course of antibiotics.the antibiotics you’re given will depend on your symptoms, but you may need to take them for up to 28 days. it's important to finish the course, even if you start to feel better.some people with severe symptoms will be referred to a specialist in hospital for injections of antibiotics.most people with lyme disease get better after antibiotic treatment. this can take months for some people, but the symptoms should improve over time.people with symptoms of lyme disease that last a long time after treatment may be referred to a specialist in hospital for advice and more blood tests.

important
some websites offer tests and treatment for lyme disease that may not be supported by scientific evidence.speak to your doctor for advice before buying tests or treatment online.





how to avoid tick bites
to reduce the risk of being bitten:cover your skin while walking outdoors and tuck your trousers into your socksuse insect repellent on your clothes and skin – products containing deet are beststick to paths whenever possiblewear light-coloured clothing so ticks are easier to spot and brush off



ongoing symptomsa few people who are diagnosed and treated for lyme disease continue to have symptoms, like tiredness, aches and loss of energy, that can last for years.these symptoms are often compared to fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome.it's not clear why this happens to some people and not others. this means there's also no agreed treatment.speak to your doctor if your symptoms come back after treatment with antibiotics or they do not start to improve.your doctor may be able to offer you further support if needed, such as:referral for a care needs assessmenttelling your employer, school or higher education institution that you require a gradual return to activitiescommunicating with children and families' social care



      page last reviewed: 27 april 2018
      next review due: 27 april 2021
    




