


nasal polyps







nasal polyps are painless soft growths inside your nose. they're not usually serious, but they can keep growing and block your nose if not treated.




check if you have nasal polyps
symptoms of nasal polyps include:blocked noserunny noseconstant need to swallow (post-nasal drip)reduced sense of smell or tastenosebleedssnoringnasal polyps can sometimes feel like a cold, but colds tend to clear up within a few days, whereas nasal polyps will not get better unless they're treated.if your polyps block your sinuses, the air pockets around your nose, you may also have symptoms of sinusitis.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




you're worried you may have nasal polypsyou have difficulty breathingyour symptoms are getting worseyou notice changes to your sense of smell

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







treatment from a gp
a gp should be able to tell if you have nasal polyps by looking inside your nose.if you have nasal polyps, you'll usually be given steroid nose drops or a spray to shrink the polyps.you may be given steroid tablets, usually for up to 2 weeks, if:your polyps are largenose drops and sprays did not worksurgery to remove polypsif there's no sign of improvement after about 10 weeks, your gp may suggest surgery to remove your polyps.most people who have surgery see an improvement, but it's common for polyps to grow back, usually within a few years.

important
you may need to keep using a steroid nasal spray after surgery to stop the polyps returning quickly.




a pharmacist can help with nasal polypsafter seeing a gp, a pharmacist can recommend:steroid nasal sprays that do not need a gp prescriptionsalt water washes (called a saline rinse or nasal douche) to help unblock your nose



    make your own salt water wash
    


in a bowl, mix 1 level teaspoon of salt and 1 level teaspoon of bicabonate of soda in about 1 pint of cooled boiled water.sniff some of the cooled mixture up 1 nostril and let it run out.repeat sniffing at least 3 times up each nostril or until your nose clears up.you can gargle any remaining mixture to help clear the back of the nose.check the mixture is not too hot before sniffing. do not swallow the salty mixture. it may make you feel sick.these salt water washes are not suitable for children.






cause of nasal polyps
it's not clear what causes nasal polyps.certain things can increase your risk of nasal polyps, like:asthmaa bad reaction to taking aspirinnasal polyps are rare in children.



      page last reviewed: 24 august 2017
      next review due: 24 august 2020
    




