


nipple discharge






nipple discharge isn't usually a sign of anything serious, but sometimes it's a good idea to get it checked just in case.



nipple discharge is often normal
lots of women have nipple discharge from time to time. it may just be normal for you.
it's also not unusual for babies (boys and girls) to have milky nipple discharge soon after they're born. this should stop in a few weeks.
nipple discharge in men isn't normal.
the colour of your discharge isn't a good way of telling if it's anything serious. normal discharge can be lots of colours.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you have nipple discharge and any of these:
      





it happens regularly and isn't just a one-off
it only comes from 1 breast
it's bloodstained or smelly
you're not breastfeeding and it leaks out without any pressure on your breast
you're over 50
you have other symptoms – such as a lump, pain, redness or swelling in your breast
you're a man

it's probably nothing serious. but there's a small chance it could be cancer, so it's best to get checked.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus



what happens at your gp appointment
the gp will look at and examine your breasts.
they may refer you to a hospital or breast clinic for further tests. these will usually show that you don't have cancer.
what happens at the breast clinic
at the hospital or breast clinic, you may have a:

breast examination
scan – usually a breast x-ray (mammogram) or ultrasound
biopsy – where a needle is inserted into your breast to remove some cells for testing

the tests are often done during the same visit.
you'll usually be told the results on the same day, although biopsy results can take longer – you should get them in a week or two.
breast cancer care has more on what to expect at a breast clinic.



causes of nipple discharge
nipple discharge has many possible causes. 
common causes include:

breastfeeding or pregnancy – see leaking nipples in pregnancy
a blocked or enlarged milk duct
a small, non-cancerous lump in the breast
a breast infection (mastitis)
a side effect of a medicine – including the contraceptive pill

breast cancer care has more on common conditions that can cause nipple discharge.



information: 
nipple discharge by itself isn't usually a sign of breast cancer.




      page last reviewed: 6 april 2018
      next review due: 6 april 2021
    




