


irregular periods






irregular periods aren't always a sign of a problem, but sometimes it's a good idea to see a doctor about them just in case.



what are irregular periods?
you have irregular periods if the length of your menstrual cycle (the gap between your periods starting) keeps changing.
your periods may come early or late.
the average menstrual cycle lasts 28 days, although it's normal for it to be a bit shorter or longer than this.
after puberty, many women develop a regular cycle with a similar length of time between periods. but it's not uncommon for it to vary by a few days each time.



causes
there are many possible causes of irregular periods. sometimes they may just be normal for you.
common causes include:

puberty – your periods might be irregular for the first year or two
the start of the menopause (usually between the ages of 45 and 55)
early pregnancy – take a pregnancy test to rule this out
some types of hormonal contraception – such as the contraceptive pill or intrauterine system (ius)
extreme weight loss or weight gain, excessive exercise or stress
medical conditions – such as polycystic ovary syndrome (pcos) or a problem with your thyroid




when to see a gp
you don't need to get medical advice if you have always had slightly irregular periods or you're still going through puberty.
but see a gp if:

your periods suddenly become irregular and you're under 45
you have periods more often than every 21 days or less often than every 35 days
your periods last longer than 7 days
there's a big difference (at least 20 days) between your shortest and longest menstrual cycle
you have irregular periods and you're struggling to get pregnant

there might not be anything wrong, but it's a good idea to get checked out to see what the cause might be.
you might be referred to a specialist called a gynaecologist if you need any tests or treatment.



trying for a baby
it can be more difficult to get pregnant if you have irregular periods because you might not ovulate (release an egg) regularly.
it can help to have sex every 2 or 3 days throughout your cycle. you don't need to time sex around ovulation. 
read more tips to increase your chances of getting pregnant.
sometimes hormone medicine or fertility treatment may be needed if you're struggling to get pregnant naturally.
more about periods and other period problems
read more about:

periods and the menstrual cycle
heavy periods
stopped or missed periods
period pain










    
    media last reviewed: 21 october 2017
    media review due: 21 october 2020
  




      page last reviewed: 9 april 2018
      next review due: 9 april 2021
    




