


bleeding from the bottom (rectal bleeding)






a small amount of one-off bleeding from the bottom is not usually a serious problem. but a gp can check.



check if you're bleeding from the bottomyou might be bleeding from the bottom if you have:blood on your toilet paperred streaks on the outside of your poopink water in the toilet bowlblood in your poo or bloody diarrhoeavery dark, smelly poo (this can be blood mixed in poo)a small amount of one-off bleeding can often go away on its own without needing treatment.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




your child has blood in their pooyou've had blood in your poo for 3 weeksyour poo has been softer, thinner or longer than normal for 3 weeksyou're in a lot of pain around the bottomyou have a pain or lump in your tummyyou've been more tired than usualyou've lost weight for no reason

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







urgent advice: get advice from 111 now if:
      




your poo is black or dark redyou have bloody diarrhoea for no obvious reason111 will tell you what to do. they can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.



    other ways to get help
    


get an urgent gp appointmenta gp may be able to treat you.ask your gp practice for an urgent appointment.








immediate action required: go to a&e or call 999 if:
      




you're bleeding non-stopthere's a lot of blood – for example, the toilet water turns red or you see large blood clots




what happens at the gp appointmentthe gp will check what's causing your symptoms.they might:check your bottom (rectum) with a gloved fingerask for a sample of poo for testingrefer you to a specialist for tests

bowel cancer risk
bleeding from the bottom is sometimes a sign of bowel cancer.this is easier to treat if it's found early, so it's important to get it checked.




common causes of bleeding from the bottomif you have other symptoms, this might give you an idea of the cause.do not self-diagnose – see a gp if you're worried.



    bright red blood on toilet paper, streaks on poo, pink toilet water
    



bright red causes


symptoms
possible causes




bright red blood and pain when pooing, itchy bottom, lumps
piles (haemorrhoids)


bright red blood and pain when pooing – often after constipation
a small tear in your anus (anal fissure)


bleeding with or without lumps, itching or pain
sexually transmitted infections (stis) like genital warts, damage from anal sex


bright red blood without pain
side effect of blood-thinning medicine like warfarin or aspirin, broken blood vessels in the gut (angiodysplasia)









    blood in poo or blood with slime
    


poo can look like it's mixed with blood if you've eaten a lot of red or purple foods like tomatoes and beetroot.but it's sometimes a sign of something else. a gp can check if you're worried.

dark causes


symptoms
possible causes




blood and yellow slime when pooing, irritated anus, non stop bottom pain
anal fistula


bloody diarrhoea with clear slime, feeling and being sick
tummy bug (gastroenteritis)


bloody diarrhoea, tummy cramps and pain, feeling bloated
an inflammatory bowel disease (ibd) like ulcerative colitis or crohn's disease


blood in poo
bleeding in the anus, bowel or lower gut from injury or another problem


blood in poo, change in pooing habits (like looser poo, diarrhoea or constipation), slime with poo
bowel polyps, early signs of bowel cancer









    very dark or black blood or poo
    


poo can look very dark or black if you:take iron tabletseat a lot of dark foods like liquorice and blueberriesbut it's sometimes a sign of something else. a gp can do a test to check this if you're worried.

black causes


symptoms
possible causes




dark or black poo
bleeding in the stomach or gut – can be from injury or a side effect of blood-thinning medicine like warfarin or aspirin


dark blood or poo with tummy pain or cramps
stomach ulcer, diverticular disease and diverticulitis


dark blood without pain
blood-thinning medicine like warfarin or aspirin, angiodysplasia (broken blood vessels in the gut)









can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 24 april 2020
      next review due: 24 april 2023
    




