


salivary gland stones






these are small stones that form in salivary glands in your mouth and can block your flow of saliva. they're not usually serious and you may be able to remove them yourself.



check if you've got salivary gland stones
most stones appear below your tongue in one of the tubes (glands) supplying saliva to your mouth. you can't always see them.



    stones are white or pale and feel hard
  

      credit: clinica claros/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/643969/view





    they vary in size, but most are about as big as a pea
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/81080/view


the stones may cause:

dull pain in your mouth that comes and goes
swelling in your mouth that flares up from time to time 
an infection around the stone 

if you feel intense pain during mealtimes, this could mean the stone is completely blocking a saliva gland. the pain usually lasts 1 to 2 hours.



things you can try yourself
you can try to free the stone by doing things to increase saliva production, such as:

sucking on a lemon or lemon drops
drinking plenty of water
gently massaging around the stone


important
don't use a sharp instrument to remove the stone as this could cause injury and infection.

if you have pain and swelling:

take paracetamol or ibuprofen
suck ice cubes or ice lollies

the symptoms won't go away until the stone has been removed.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      





you're unable to remove the stone yourself
the stone has caused an infection – signs include pain, redness or pus around the stone, and a high temperature (you feel hot and shivery)


information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus






treatment to remove the stones
your gp may attempt to gently remove the stone with a thin, blunt instrument.
if that's not possible, you may need to have the stone removed in hospital.



you can't always prevent salivary gland stones
it's not clear what causes salivary gland stones, so there's no way to prevent them.
they're not generally linked with any other health problems.
salivary stones don't usually come back, but if you keep getting them you might be advised to have one of your salivary glands removed.



      page last reviewed: 9 october 2017
      next review due: 9 october 2020
    




