


scabies







scabies is very common and anyone can get it. it should be treated quickly to stop it spreading.




check if it's scabies
one of the first symptoms is intense itching, especially at night.



    tiny mites lay eggs in the skin, leaving silvery lines with a dot at 1 end.
  

      credit: john radcliffe hospital/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/262408/view





    the rash can appear anywhere, but it often starts between the fingers.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/262479/view





    the rash spreads and turns into tiny red spots.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/262452/view


the scabies rash usually spreads across the whole body, apart from the head.elderly people, young children and those with a weakened immune system may also develop a rash on their head and neck.


when it's not scabiesmany other things can cause itchy skin and rashes in babies and children.




a pharmacist can help with scabies
scabies is not usually a serious condition, but it does need to be treated.a pharmacist will recommend a cream or lotion that you apply over your whole body. it's important to read the instructions carefully.you'll need to repeat the treatment 1 week later.scabies is very infectious, but it can take up to 8 weeks for the rash to appear.everyone in the household needs to be treated at the same time, even if they do not have symptoms.anyone you have had sexual contact with in the past 8 weeks should also be treated.








find a pharmacy






things you can do during treatment to stop scabies spreading

do





wash all bedding and clothing in the house at 50c or higher on the first day of treatment





put clothing that cannot be washed in a sealed bag for 3 days until the mites die





stop babies and children sucking treatment from their hands by putting socks or mittens on them




don't






do not have sex or close physical contact until you have completed the full course of treatment






do not share bedding, clothing or towels with someone with scabies



how long it takes to get rid of scabiesyou or your child can go back to work or school 24 hours after the first treatment.although the treatment kills the scabies mites quickly, the itching can carry on for a few weeks.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




your skin is still itching 4 weeks after treatment has finished

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus






scabies can spread easilyscabies are passed from person to person by skin-to-skin contact. you cannot get scabies from pets.people who live or work closely together in nurseries, university halls of residence or nursing homes are more at risk.

important
anyone can get scabies. it has nothing to do with poor hygiene.




complications of scabiesscratching the rash can cause skin infections like impetigo.scabies can make conditions like eczema or psoriasis worse.



can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 10 november 2017
      next review due: 10 november 2020
    




