


shin splints






shin splints is a type of shin pain, usually caused by exercise. it's not serious and there are things you can do to help get better.


check if you have shin splints
shin splints usually happen when you do exercise like running.
you will have pain and tenderness along the front of your lower leg (shin). 
things you can do to help
shin splints usually get better within a few weeks. there are things you can do to get better quicker.

do





      take paracetamol or ibuprofen to ease the pain
    




      put an ice pack (or bag of frozen vegetables) in a towel on your shin for up to 20 minutes every 2 to 3 hours
    




      switch to gentle exercise such as yoga or swimming while healing
    




      exercise on soft ground, if you can, when you're feeling better
    




warm up before exercise and stretch after exercise





      make sure your trainers or shoes support your feet properly – find out more about choosing the right shoes




don't






      do not continue doing the exercise that caused your shin splints
    





      do not rush back into exercise at the level you were at – build your exercise routine back up slowly
    








non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      





you've tried things to help but the pain is not getting better after a week
the pain is getting worse


information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus



treatment from a gp
a gp will ask about your symptoms and examine your leg. if it's not getting better, they may be able to refer you to a physiotherapist.
physiotherapy from the nhs might not be available everywhere and waiting times can be long. you can also get it privately.






find a physiotherapist








urgent advice: get advice from 111 now if:
      





your shin pain is severe
you've injured your shin

111 will tell you what to do. they can tell you the right place to get help if you need to see someone.
go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111.




causes of shin splints
shin splints happen when you've put too much stress on your leg. 
you're more likely to get shin splints if:

you have started exercising after not being active for some time
you run or jump on hard surfaces
you do not have a good running technique




      page last reviewed: 10 december 2019
      next review due: 10 december 2022
    




