


sick building syndrome






sick building syndrome is the name for symptoms you only get while in a particular building, usually an office.



check if you have sick building syndrome
symptoms of sick building syndrome get worse the longer you're in a particular building and get better after you leave.
other people in the building may also have symptoms.
possible symptoms include:

headaches
blocked or runny nose
dry, itchy skin
dry, sore eyes
rashes
tiredness and difficulty concentrating


information: 
these symptoms are common and can be caused by lots of things. they're unlikely to be sick building syndrome if you have them all the time or in lots of places.




how to ease the symptoms yourself
it might help to:

open windows to improve ventilation, if you can
not set the temperature too high (aim for about 19c) and don't change it lots of times during the day
try to reduce workplace stress
take regular screen breaks if you use a computer
go outside for some fresh air during lunchtime and other breaks

try these things to see if your symptoms improve.







non-urgent advice:  if you think you have sick building syndrome, speak to:
      





your manager or employer – if you get symptoms at work
the building manager or owner (such as the landlord) – if you get symptoms in another building

they should look into the problem and try to find a solution.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus



you can also get help and advice from:

the environmental health service at your local authority
your nearest health and safety executive (hse) office

the hse has advice for employers and building managers on how to deal with sick building syndrome.



causes of sick building syndrome
it's not clear exactly what causes sick building syndrome.
it's probably due to a combination of things, including:

poor ventilation or poorly maintained air conditioning systems
dust, smoke, fumes or fabric fibres in the air
bright or flickering lights

sick building syndrome is most common in open-plan offices, but you can get it in any building.



      page last reviewed: 4 september 2017
      next review due: 4 september 2020
    




