



overview
        
 - 
          stomach ulcer
        



contents


overview


symptoms


causes


diagnosis


treatment


complications









stomach ulcers, also known as gastric ulcers, are open sores that develop on the lining of the stomach.ulcers can also occur in part of the intestine just beyond the stomach. these are known as duodenal ulcers.both stomach and duodenal ulcers are sometimes referred to as peptic ulcers. here the term stomach ulcer will be used, although the information applies equally to duodenal ulcers.



signs and symptomsthe most common symptom of a stomach ulcer is a burning or gnawing pain in the centre of the tummy (abdomen).but stomach ulcers aren't always painful and some people may experience other symptoms, such as indigestion, heartburn and feeling sick.read more about the symptoms of a stomach ulcer and diagnosing a stomach ulcer.



when to seek medical adviceyou should visit your gp if you think you may have a stomach ulcer.seek urgent medical advice if you experience any of the following symptoms:vomiting blood – the blood can appear bright red or have a dark brown, grainy appearance, similar to coffee groundspassing dark, sticky, tar-like stoolsa sudden, sharp pain in your tummy that gets steadily worsethese could be a sign of a serious complication, such as internal bleeding.



what causes stomach ulcers?stomach ulcers occur when the layer that protects the stomach lining from stomach acid breaks down, which allows the stomach lining to become damaged.this is usually a result of:an infection with helicobacter pylori (h. pylori) bacteriataking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids), such as ibuprofen or aspirin – particularly if they're taken for a long time or at high dosesit used to be thought that stress or certain foods might cause stomach ulcers, but there's little evidence to suggest this is the case.read more about the causes of stomach ulcers.



who's affectedit's not known how many people have stomach ulcers, although they're thought to be quite common.stomach ulcers can affect people of any age, including children, but mostly occur in people aged 60 or over. men are more commonly affected than women.



how stomach ulcers are treatedwith treatment, most stomach ulcers will heal within a month or two. the treatment recommended for you will depend on what caused the ulcer.most people will be prescribed a medication called a proton pump inhibitor (ppi) to reduce the amount of acid their stomach produces and allow the ulcer to heal naturally.if an h. pylori infection is responsible for the ulcers, antibiotics will also be used to kill the bacteria, which should prevent the ulcer coming back.if the ulcers are caused by the use of nsaids, ppis are usually prescribed and your doctor will discuss whether you should keep using nsaids.alternative medication to nsaids, such as paracetamol, may be recommended.stomach ulcers can come back after treatment, although this is less likely to happen if the underlying cause is addressed.read more about treating stomach ulcers.



possible complicationscomplications of stomach ulcers are relatively uncommon, but they can be very serious and potentially life threatening.the main complications include:bleeding at the site of the ulcerthe stomach lining at the site of the ulcer splitting open (perforation)the ulcer blocking the movement of food through the digestive system (gastric obstruction)read more about the complications of stomach ulcers.



can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 17 september 2018
      next review due: 17 september 2021
    





next
:
symptoms










