



symptoms
        
 - 
          stomach cancer
        



contents


symptoms


causes


tests and next steps


treatment


where to find help and support









stomach cancer is a cancer that's found anywhere in the stomach. it's not very common in the uk.



      credit: nhs.uk





main symptoms of stomach cancer
there are many possible symptoms of stomach cancer, but they might be hard to spot.they can affect your digestion, such as:heartburn or acid refluxhaving problems swallowing (dysphagia)feeling or being sicksymptoms of indigestion, such as burping a lotfeeling full very quickly when eatingother symptoms include:loss of appetite or losing weight without trying toa lump at the top of your tummypain at the top of your tummyfeeling tired or having no energy


if you have another condition, such as gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, you may get symptoms like these regularly.you might find you get used to them. but it's important to be checked by a gp if your symptoms change, get worse, or do not feel normal for you.






non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you have:
      




problems swallowinga lump in your tummylost a noticeable amount of weight over the last 6 to 12 months without tryingother symptoms of stomach cancer that get worse or do not get better after 2 weeksa condition that causes symptoms with your digestion that are not getting better after 2 weeks of using your usual treatments

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus






important
these symptoms are very common and can be caused by many different conditions. having them does not definitely mean you have stomach cancer.but it's important to get them checked by a gp. this is because if they're caused by cancer, finding it early makes it more treatable.







urgent advice: get advice from 111 now if:
      




you're being sick for more than 2 daysyou have symptoms that you are worried about, but are not sure where to get help111 will tell you what to do. they can arrange a phone call from a nurse or doctor if you need one.go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111




what happens at the gp appointmentthe gp may feel your tummy.they may ask you to give a poo or pee sample, or have a blood test.the gp may refer you to see a specialist in hospital for more tests if they think you have a condition that needs to be investigated.this may be an urgent referral, usually within 2 weeks, if you have certain symptoms. this does not definitely mean you have cancer.

information: 
find out morecancer research uk: seeing a gp about symptoms of stomach cancer.




      page last reviewed: 21 october 2019
      next review due: 21 october 2022
    





next
:
causes










