


stye







styes are common and should clear up on their own within a week or 2. they're rarely a sign of anything serious, but may be painful until they heal.




check if you have a stye



    a stye is a small, painful lump on or inside the eyelid or around the eye.
  

      credit: sue ford/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/252441/view





    the skin may be red, swollen and filled with yellow pus like a pimple.
  

      credit: western ophthalmic hospital/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/252333/view





    your eye may be red and watery but your vision should not be affected.
  

      credit: francoise sauze/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/252669/view


a stye usually only affects 1 eye, but it's possible to have more than 1 at a time.it's probably not a stye if:there's no lump – if your eye or eyelid is swollen, red and watery it's more likely to be conjunctivitis or blepharitisthe lump is hard but not very painful – it's more likely to be a chalazion




how you can treat a stye yourself
to reduce swelling and help the stye heal:soak a clean flannel in warm water.hold it against your eye for 5 to 10 minutes.repeat this 3 or 4 times a day.to relieve the pain, take painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen. do not give aspirin to children under 16.avoid wearing contact lenses and eye make-up until the stye has burst and healed.

important
do not try to burst a stye or remove an eyelash yourself. this can spread the infection.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if your stye:
      




is very painful or swollendoes not get better within a few weeksaffects your vision

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







treatment from a gp
if you have a stye, your gp may:burst the stye with a thin, sterilised needleremove the eyelash closest to the styerefer you to an eye specialist in hospital



you cannot always prevent a styestyes are often caused by bacteria infecting an eyelash follicle or eyelid gland.you're also more likely to get a stye if you have long-term blepharitis.you can help avoid styes by keeping your eyes clean.

do





wash your face and remove eye make-up before bed





replace your eye make-up every 6 months





keep your eyelids and eyelashes clean, especially if you have blepharitis




don't






do not share towels or flannels with someone who has a stye






do not rub your eyes if you have not recently washed your hands






do not put contact lenses in before washing your hands






can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 12 january 2018
      next review due: 12 january 2021
    




