


testicle lumps and swellings






lumps and swellings in the testicles (balls) aren't usually caused by anything serious, but you should get them checked by a gp.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you have:
      





a lump in your testicles
swollen testicles
a change in the shape of your testicles
a change in the way your testicles feel
one testicle that's become bigger than the other
aching or discomfort in your testicles that doesn't go away

lumps in the testicles can be a sign of testicular cancer. this is easier to treat if it's found early.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus







immediate action required: go to a&e if you get sudden, unbearable pain in your testicles or tummy
      




this could be caused by your testicle becoming twisted, which needs to be treated in hospital as soon as possible.








find your nearest a&e


what happens at your gp appointment
to find out what the cause of your lump or swelling is, the gp may:

look at and feel your testicles
shine a torch through the bag of skin containing your testicles (scrotum) to check for a build-up of fluid 
refer you for an ultrasound scan

treatment for a lump or swelling depends on the cause. you might not need treatment if it doesn't cause any problems and isn't getting worse.
if it's painful or very big, your gp may refer you to a specialist for an operation to drain, shrink or remove it.



causes of testicle lumps and swellings
lumps and swellings in the testicles can have lots of different causes.
most are caused by something harmless, such as a build-up of fluid (cyst) or swollen veins in the testicles (varicocele).
but sometimes they can be a sign of something serious, such as testicular cancer.
don't try to self-diagnose the cause of your lump – always see a gp.



      page last reviewed: 31 july 2017
      next review due: 31 july 2020
    




