


tinnitus







tinnitus is the name for hearing noises that are not caused by an outside source. it's not usually a sign of any serious conditions and generally improves over time. there are treatments that can help.




check if you have tinnitus
tinnitus can sound like:ringingbuzzingwhooshinghumminghissingthrobbingmusic or singingyou may hear these sounds in 1 or both ears, or in your head. they may come and go, or you might hear them all the time.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




you have tinnitus regularly or constantlyyour tinnitus is getting worseyour tinnitus is bothering you – for example, it's affecting your sleep or concentrationask for an urgent gp appointment if you have tinnitus:after a head injurywith sudden hearing loss, weakness in the muscles of your face, or a spinning sensation (vertigo)that beats in time with your pulse

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus





what happens at your appointmentyour gp will look in your ears to see if your tinnitus is caused by something they can treat, such as an ear infection or a build-up of earwax.they might also check for any hearing loss.you may be referred to a specialist for further tests and treatment.




things you can try to ease tinnitus

do





try to relax – deep breathing or yoga may help





try to find ways to improve your sleep, such as sticking to a bedtime routine or cutting down on caffeine





join a support group – talking to other people with tinnitus may help you cope




don't






do not have total silence – listening to soft music or sounds (called sound therapy) can distract you from the tinnitus






do not focus on it, as this can make it worse – hobbies and activities can help take your mind off it





the british tinnitus association has more information on sound therapy, and runs support groups and a free helpline on 0800 018 0527.action on hearing loss has a free helpline on 0808 808 0123.




treatments for tinnitus
if the cause of your tinnitus is unknown or cannot be treated, your gp or specialist may refer you for a type of talking therapy.this could be:tinnitus counselling – to help you learn about your tinnitus and find ways of coping with itcognitive behavioural therapy (cbt) – to change the way you think about your tinnitus and reduce anxietytinnitus retraining therapy – using sound therapy to retrain your brain to tune out and be less aware of the tinnitustinnitus retraining therapy may be available on the nhs for people with severe or persistent tinnitus. it's widely available privately.




causes of tinnitus
it's not always clear what causes tinnitus, but it's often linked with:some form of hearing lossménière's diseaseconditions such as diabetes, thyroid disorders or multiple sclerosisanxiety or depressiontaking certain medication – tinnitus can be a side effect of some chemotherapy medicines, antibiotics, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids) and aspirin












    
    media last reviewed: 19 june 2018
    media review due: 19 june 2021
  




can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 29 march 2018
      next review due: 29 march 2021
    




