


tonsillitis







tonsillitis is a common childhood illness, but teenagers and adults can get it, too. it usually goes away on its own after a few days.




check if you have tonsillitis
tonsillitis can feel like a bad cold or flu. the tonsils at the back of your throat will be red and swollen.the main symptoms in children and adults are:a sore throatdifficulty swallowinghoarse or no voicea high temperature of 38c or abovecoughinga headachefeeling sickearachefeeling tiredsometimes the symptoms can be more severe and include:swollen, painful glands in your neck (feels like a lump on the side of your neck)white pus-filled spots on your tonsils at the back of your throatbad breath





    what tonsils with pus-filled spots can look like
    





    tonsils with pus-filled spots at the back of the throat.
  

      credit: dr p. marazzi/science photo library
https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/262873/view






if you're not sure it's tonsillitislook at other sore throat symptoms.



how long tonsillitis lastssymptoms will usually go away after 3 to 4 days.tonsillitis is not contagious, but the infections that cause it are (for example, colds and flu).to stop these infections spreading:stay off work or keep your child at home until you or your child feel betteruse tissues when you cough or sneeze and throw them away afterwash your hands after coughing or sneezing




how to treat tonsillitis yourself
tonsillitis usually has to run its course.to help ease the symptoms:get plenty of restdrink cool drinks to soothe the throattake paracetamol or ibuprofen (do not give aspirin to children under 16)gargle with warm salty water (children should not try this)





    how to gargle with salty water
    


dissolve half a teaspoon of salt in a glass of warm water (warm water helps salt dissolve).gargle with the solution, then spit it out. do not swallow it.repeat as often as you like.this is not suitable for younger children.





a pharmacist can help with tonsillitisspeak to a pharmacist about tonsillitis.they can give advice and suggest treatments to ease a sore throat, like:lozengesthroat spraysantiseptic solutions






find a pharmacy









non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      




you have white pus-filled spots on the tonsils at the back of your throatthe sore throat is so painful it's difficult to eat or drinkthe symptoms do not go away after 4 days

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus



what happens at your appointmentyour doctor can usually tell its tonsillitis by asking about your symptoms and looking at the back of your throat.sometimes they might:wipe a cotton bud at the back of your throat to test for bacteriaorganise a blood test to rule out glandular fever (if your symptoms are severe or will not go away)usually you'll get any test results back within a couple of days.




treatment from a gp
treatment will depend on what caused your tonsillitis:a virus (viral tonsillitis), which most children and adults have – this type has to run its course and antibiotics will not helpbacteria (bacterial tonsillitis) – your gp may prescribe antibioticsusually your gp will have to wait for the test results to tell which type you have.

important
it's very rare that someone needs to have their tonsils taken out.this is usually only the case if you have severe tonsillitis that keeps coming back.




complications with tonsillitis (quinsy)complications with tonsillitis are very rare. if they happen, they mostly affect young children aged 2 to 4.sometimes you can get a pocket filled with pus (abscess) between your tonsils and the wall of your throat. this is called quinsy.




urgent advice: see a gp urgently or go to a&e if you have:
      




a severe sore throat that quickly gets worseswelling inside the mouth and throatdifficulty speakingdifficulty swallowingdifficulty breathingdifficulty opening your mouththese are signs of quinsy.





can you help us?
we are looking for people who have not been tested for coronavirus to help us improve the coronavirus (covid-19) testing service.if you're interested, take our survey




      page last reviewed: 15 december 2017
      next review due: 15 december 2020
    




