


toxoplasmosis






toxoplasmosis is a common infection that you can catch from the poo of infected cats or infected meat. it's usually harmless but can cause serious problems in some people.



check if you have toxoplasmosis
toxoplasmosis doesn't usually cause any symptoms and most people don't realise they have had it. 
some people get flu-like symptoms, such as:

high temperature  (fever)
aching muscles
tiredness
feeling sick
sore throat
swollen glands

if you do have symptoms, they normally get better on their own within about 6 weeks. 
once you have had toxoplasmosis you are immune to it for the rest of your life.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      





you are pregnant or you have a weak immune system and you think you may have toxoplasmosis 

toxoplasmosis is usually harmless, but in rare cases it can lead to serious problems. 
you are more at risk if:

you get infected in pregnancy – toxoplasmosis can cause miscarriage. if it spreads to your baby it can cause serious complications, especially if you catch it early in pregnancy
your immune system is weakened – for example, if you have hiv or you are having chemotherapy. the infection may affect your eyes or brain


information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus



what happens at your gp appointment
the gp may do blood tests to see if you have been infected. they can also prescribe medicines to treat the infection if necessary. 
if you are pregnant and you test positive for toxoplasmosis, your gp can refer you for more tests to see if your baby has been infected. this is very rare.
the baby charity tommy's has more advice on toxoplasmosis and pregnancy.



how to prevent toxoplasmosis
the parasite that causes toxoplasmosis is found in the poo of infected cats and in infected meat. you can also catch it from soil that has been contaminated by cat poo.
if you are pregnant or have a weak immune system:

do





      wear gloves while gardening 
    




      wash your hands before preparing food and eating
    




      wash hands, knives and chopping boards thoroughly after preparing raw meat 
    




      wash fruit and vegetables thoroughly to get rid of any traces of soil 
    




      wear gloves while emptying cat litter trays and empty them every day
    



don't






      do not eat raw or undercooked meat, or cured meats like salami or parma ham
    





      do not have unpasteurised goats' milk or any products made from it 
    





      do not touch or handle pregnant sheep or lambs
    





      page last reviewed: 29 august 2017
      next review due: 29 august 2020
    




