


tremor or shaking hands






a tremor is when you're not able to control shaking or trembling in part of your body. see a gp if a tremor is affecting your life as treatment may help to reduce it.



when a tremor is normal
it's normal to have a slight tremor. for example, if you hold your hands or arms out in front of you, they won't be completely still.
sometimes a tremor becomes more noticeable. 
this often happens:

as you get older 
when you're stressed, tired, anxious or angry
after drinking caffeine (for example, in tea, coffee or cola) or smoking
if you're very hot or cold

some medicines and conditions can also cause a tremor. speak to your gp before you stop taking any prescribed medication.







non-urgent advice:  see a gp if you have a tremor or shaking hands and:
      





it's getting worse over time
it's affecting your daily activities

your doctor will want to make sure the tremor isn't caused by another condition. they may also be able to offer treatment.

information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus





what happens at your appointment
your gp will examine you and ask:

if you have any other symptoms
if you're taking any medication
about your and your family's medical history – some types of tremor run in families

a mild tremor that isn't caused by another condition doesn't usually need any treatment. your gp may want to monitor you to make sure it doesn't get any worse. 
your gp may refer you to a specialist for further tests if your tremor could be a symptom of a condition such as parkinson's disease or multiple sclerosis.



treating a severe tremor
if you have a tremor that's affecting your life, your gp may prescribe medicine. medicine won't cure the tremor, but it often helps to reduce the shaking or trembling. 
you may need to take medicine all the time, or only when you need it – for example, before a stressful situation that causes your tremor to get worse.
if a tremor is affecting your head or voice, you may be offered injections to block the nerves and relax the muscles.
in rare cases, brain surgery may be an option to treat a severe tremor that isn't helped by medication.
read more about brain surgery for severe tremor on the national tremor foundation (ntf) website.

information: 
the ntf also offers support and information on tremor if it's affecting your life.




      page last reviewed: 10 october 2017
      next review due: 10 october 2020
    




