


twitching eyes and muscles






twitches are common and very rarely a sign of anything serious. they often go away on their own, but see a gp if a twitch lasts more than 2 weeks.



twitches are usually nothing to worry about
most people get twitches from time to time. 
they're often linked to:

stress and anxiety
tiredness and exhaustion
drinking caffeine or alcohol
some medicines – check the side effects on the packet or leaflet

they can affect any part of the body. twitches in the eyes or legs are particularly common.
you may also have tingling or cramps (spasms) in the same area.



how you can help stop a twitch
a twitch may come and go, but will normally stop in a few days or weeks. 
there isn't usually any treatment for it.
there are some things you can do to help:

do





      get plenty of rest
    




      try to find ways to relax
    




      stretch and massage any muscles affected by cramps
    




      try not to worry about it – a twitch is usually harmless, and worrying can make it worse
    



don't






      do not drink lots of caffeine, such as tea and coffee
    





      do not drink lots of alcohol
    





      do not stop taking a prescribed medicine without getting medical advice, even if you think it could be causing your twitch
    









non-urgent advice:  see a gp if:
      





you have a twitch for more than 2 weeks
you have a twitch in more than 1 place
the affected area feels weak
you think a prescribed medicine might be causing your twitch


information: 
coronavirus update: how to contact a gpit's still important to get help from a gp if you need it. to contact your gp surgery:visit their websiteuse the nhs appcall themfind out about using the nhs during coronavirus





what happens at your gp appointment
your gp may:

check for causes of a twitch, like stress or a medicine you're taking
ask you to come back if the twitch hasn't stopped in a few weeks
refer you to a specialist called a neurologist for tests to look for conditions that can cause a twitch




    conditions that can cause a twitch
    


most twitches aren't caused by a medical condition. 
but a twitch that doesn't go away or occurs with other symptoms could be something like:

benign fasciculation syndrome – long-lasting twitches and cramps caused by overactive nerves
dystonia – a group of uncommon conditions that cause muscle spasms 
motor neurone disease – a rare condition that causes weakness and gets worse over time






      page last reviewed: 9 february 2018
      next review due: 9 february 2021
    




