




        co-dydramol  - brand names: paramol, remedeine, remedeine forte



on this page

about co-dydramol
key facts
who can and cannot take co-dydramol
how and when to take co-dydramol
taking co-dydramol with other painkillers
side effects
how to cope with side effects
pregnancy and breastfeeding
cautions with other medicines
common questions








1. about co-dydramol
co-dydramol is a mixture of 2 different painkillers: paracetamol and dihydrocodeine.it's used to treat aches and pains, including headaches, migraines, muscle and joint pain, period pain and toothache.you will usually take co-dydramol when everyday painkillers – such as aspirin, ibuprofen and paracetamol – have not worked on their own.this medicine usually comes as tablets.you can buy lower-strength tablets from pharmacies. higher-strength tablets are only available on prescription.


2. key facts
co-dydramol comes in 4 different strengths. you can buy the lowest-strength tablets from pharmacies. higher strengths are only available on prescription.the most common side effects of co-dydramol are constipation and feeling sick or sleepy.if you've bought co-dydramol from a pharmacy, do not use it for more than 3 days without talking to your doctor.it's possible to become addicted to the dihydrocodeine in co-dydramol. however, this is rare if you're taking it as a painkiller and your doctor reviews your treatment regularly.


3. who can and cannot take co-dydramol
adults and children aged 12 years and over can take co-dydramol.

important
do not give co-dydramol to a child under the age of 12 years unless their doctor prescribes it.


co-dydramol is not suitable for some people. tell your doctor before starting this medicine if you:have had an allergic reaction to co-dydramol, paracetamol, dihydrocodeine or any other medicine in the pasthave any problems with your digestion, such as irritable bowel syndrome or crohn's diseasehave lung problems, asthma or other breathing difficultieshave a head injuryhave adrenal gland problemshave a condition that causes seizures or fitshave an underactive thyroidregularly drink more than the maximum recommended amount of alcohol (14 units a week)have liver or kidney problemshave myasthenia gravis, a rare illness that causes muscle weaknessare trying to become pregnant, are already pregnant or are breastfeedingare under 18 years and have had your tonsils or adenoids taken out because of obstructive sleep apnoea


4. how and when to take co-dydramol
you can take co-dydramol with or without food.swallow the tablets whole with a drink of water. do not crush them.some tablets have a line down the middle to help you break them into 2 halves. if you have trouble swallowing medicines, break the tablet and then take each half separately.it's important to leave a gap of at least 4 hours between doses of co-dydramol. taking too much can be very dangerous because the paracetamol in it can cause liver damage.different strengths of co-dydramolco-dydramol comes in 4 different strengths. the tablets contain either 7.46mg, 10mg, 20mg or 30mg of dihydrocodeine.all co-dydramol tablets also contain 500mg of paracetamol – the same as in a standard paracetamol tablet or capsule.the strength is shown as 2 numbers on the packet. these give the amount of dihydrocodeine followed by the amount of paracetamol. so if it says 10/500 on the packet, this means the tablets contains 10mg of dihydrocodeine and 500mg of paracetamol.you can buy the lowest strength of co-dydramol (7.46/500) without a prescription from a pharmacy. the higher strengths (10/500, 20/500 and 30/500) are only available on prescription.how much to takeadults (16 years and older) – 1 to 2 co-dydramol tablets (of any strength) up to 4 times in 24 hours. always leave at least 4 hours between doses.children (12 to 15 years) – 1 tablet up to 4 times in 24 hours. if your child has been prescribed co-dydramol, follow the doctor's instructions. always leave at least 4 hours between doses.

important
the maximum dose in 24 hours for:adults is 8 co-dydramol tabletschildren is 4 co-dydramol tablets, unless their doctor prescribes a higher dose


how long to take it forif you've bought co-dydramol from a pharmacy, do not take it for more than 3 days. if you still have pain, talk to your pharmacist or doctor.if your doctor prescribed co-dydramol for you, take it for as long as they tell you to.what if i forget to take it?if you take co-dydramol regularly and miss a dose, take it as soon as you remember. unless it's nearly time for your next dose, in which case skip the missed dose and take your next one at the usual time.never take double doses of co-dydramol, and never take extra doses to catch up.if you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you. you could also ask your pharmacist for advice on other ways to help you remember to take your medicine.what if i take too much?

important
taking 1 or 2 extra tablets by accident is unlikely to be harmful, as long as you do not take more than 8 tablets in 24 hours.wait at least 24 hours before taking any more co-dydramol.







urgent advice: get help from 111 now if:
      




you take more than 2 extra tablets of co-dydramolyou take more than 8 tablets of co-dydramol in 24 hourstaking too much co-dydramol can be dangerous and you may need treatment.go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111








immediate action required: call 999 or go to a&e now if:
      




you take too much co-dydramol and are finding it difficult to breathe



if you need to go to a&e, do not drive yourself. get someone else to drive you or call for an ambulance.take the co-dydramol box, or the leaflet inside the packet, plus any remaining medicine with you.


5. taking co-dydramol with other painkillers
it's safe to take co-dydramol with ibuprofen or aspirin. however, do not give aspirin to children under the age of 16 (unless their doctor prescribes it).do not take co-dydramol with paracetamol or other medicines that contain paracetamol. these include painkillers such as tramacet (paracetamol combined with tramadol) and co-codamol, migraine remedies, and some cough and cold remedies such as lemsip and night nurse.co-dydramol already contains paracetamol, so you could be at risk of a paracetamol overdose.

important
before taking any other medicines, check the label to see whether they contain paracetamol.




6. side effects
like all medicines, co-dydramol can cause side effects, although not everyone gets them. many people have no side effects or only minor ones. you are more likely to have side effects if you take the higher strengths of co-dydramol.common side effectscommon side effects happen in more than 1 in 100 people. tell your doctor if the side effects bother you or do not go away. common side effects include:constipationfeeling or being sick (nausea or vomiting)feeling sleepyheadachesserious side effectsserious side effects are rare and happen in less than 1 in 100 people.tell a doctor straight away if you have:a skin rashdifficulty peeingchanges in your eyesightdizzinessserious allergic reactionin rare cases, it's possible to have a serious allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) to co-dydramol.





immediate action required: call 999 or go to a&e if:
      




you get a skin rash that may include itchy, red, swollen, blistered or peeling skinyou're wheezingyou get tightness in the chest or throatyou have trouble breathing or talkingyour mouth, face, lips, tongue or throat start swellingyou could be having a serious allergic reaction and may need immediate treatment in hospital.



these are not all the side effects of co-dydramol. for a full list, see the leaflet inside your medicine packet.

information: 
you can report any suspected side effect to the uk safety scheme.




7. how to cope with side effects
what to do about:constipation – eat more high-fibre foods, such as fresh fruit and vegetables, and cereals. try to drink several glasses of water or another non-alcoholic liquid each day. if you can, try to exercise more regularly – for example, by going for a daily walk or run.feeling or being sick – try taking co-dydramol with or just after a meal or snack. stick to simple meals and do not eat rich or spicy food. if you're being sick, try small frequent sips of water to avoid dehydration. feelings of sickness should normally wear off after a few days. talk to your doctor about taking an anti-sickness medicine if it carries on for longer.feeling sleepy – this side effect should go away within a few days as your body gets used to the dihydrocodeine. do not drive, cycle or use tools or machinery if you're feeling this way. do not drink any alcohol, as this will make you feel more tired. speak to your doctor if it carries on for longer.headaches – make sure you rest and drink plenty of fluids. do not drink too much alcohol. ask your pharmacist to recommend a painkiller. talk to your doctor if the headaches last longer than a week or are severe.


8. pregnancy and breastfeeding
co-dydramol and pregnancyco-dydramol is not generally recommended during pregnancy. there may be safer medicines that you can take. ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice.speak to your doctor or pharmacist before taking co-dydramol.co-dydramol and breastfeedingco-dydramol is not normally recommended while breastfeeding. this is because no one knows whether dihydrocodeine can get into breast milk.if your doctor prescribes co-dydramol, follow their instructions. you will usually take it for a short time and at the lowest dose. speak to your doctor or pharmacist straight away if your baby has any breathing problems.





non-urgent advice:  tell your doctor if you're:
      




pregnanttrying to get pregnantbreastfeeding





9. cautions with other medicines
some medicines can affect the way co-dydramol works.tell your doctor if you're taking these medicines before you start taking co-dydramol:sleeping pills or tranquillisersantidepressantsmedicines to stop you feeling sick or vomiting, such as domperidone or metoclopramideblood-thinning medicines, such as warfarinantihistaminesepilepsy medicinesantipsychoticsmedicines to treat tuberculosis (tb)medicines to treat anxietymixing co-dydramol with herbal remedies and supplementsthere's not enough information to say that complementary medicines and herbal remedies are safe to take with co-dydramol. they're not tested in the same way as pharmacy and prescription medicines. they're generally not tested for the effect they have on other medicines.

important
for safety, tell your pharmacist or doctor if you're taking any other medicines, including herbal remedies or supplements.




10. common questions




    how does co-dydramol work?
    


co-dydramol contains paracetamol and dihydrocodeine. these 2 painkillers work in different ways to relieve pain.paracetamol seems to work by blocking chemical messengers in the brain that tell us we have pain. paracetamol also reduces a high temperature by affecting the chemical messengers in an area of the brain that regulates body temperature.dihydrocodeine belongs to a group of medicines called opiates. it works in the central nervous system and the brain to block pain signals to the rest of the body.as well as blocking pain, dihydrocodeine can have some less positive effects. your breathing may become slow and shallow. it may also slow down your digestion, which is why dihydrocodeine can cause constipation.







    when will i feel better?
    


co-dydramol takes up to 1 hour to work and keeps working for about 5 hours.







    how long should i take it for?
    


if you've bought co-dydramol from a pharmacy, do not use it for more than 3 days.if your pain has not gone away, talk to your pharmacist or doctor. if your doctor has prescribed co-dydramol for you, follow their advice about how long to take it for.depending on why you're taking it, you may need to take it for a few days or weeks at most – for example, if you're in pain after an injury or operation.talk to your doctor if you're not sure how long you need to take co-dydramol for.







    is it safe to take co-dydramol long term?
    


it is safe to take co-dydramol for long-term conditions, but your body can become tolerant to it, which means it does not work as well at reducing pain.do not increase the dose if this happens. talk to your doctor, who might prescribe you a different strength or a different painkiller.







    is co-dydramol addictive?
    


if you take co-dydramol regularly for a long time, you can become addicted to the dihydrocodeine in it. however, if you're taking it as a painkiller under medical supervision, this is unlikely to happen to you.people who take it as a recreational drug to "get high" are more likely to become addicted.







    how will i know if i'm addicted?
    


if you're addicted to co-dydramol, you may find it difficult to stop taking it or feel you need to take it more often than necessary.if you suddenly stop taking it, you may suffer from withdrawal symptoms. these include:feeling agitatedfeeling nervousshakingsweatingtalk to your doctor if you're worried or need help coming off co-dydramol.







    are there other painkillers i can try?
    


some painkillers work better than others for certain types of pain. for example, the best painkiller to ease your headache may not be the best one for your backache.before taking co-dydramol, try taking paracetamol to see if that helps. paracetamol can relieve most types of pain.non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids), such as ibuprofen and naproxen, can reduce inflammation as well as pain. these are good for joint, back and muscular pain.however, nsaids are not suitable for some people. this includes people with stomach ulcers, or severe heart, kidney or liver problems. if you want to try nsaids, speak to your pharmacist or doctor.







    can i drink alcohol with it?
    


drinking alcohol while you're taking co-dydramol can make you feel sleepier. it can also increase the risk of serious side effects.it's best to stop drinking alcohol during the first few days of treatment until you see how the co-dydramol affects you.if you feel sleepy with co-dydramol, do not drink alcohol while you're taking it.







    is there any food or drink i need to avoid?
    


you can eat and drink normally while taking co-dydramol.







    will it affect my contraception?
    


co-dydramol does not affect any type of contraception, including the combined pill or emergency contraception.but if co-dydramol makes you vomit (sick) for more than 24 hours, your contraceptive pills may not protect you from pregnancy. look on the pill packet to find out what to do.find out what to do if you're on the pill and you're being sick or have diarrhoea







    will it affect my fertility?
    


co-dydramol can temporarily reduce fertility in men and women.if you take high doses of co-dydramol for a long time, it can cause a health problem called hypogonadism. hypogonadism is where the body does not make enough sex hormones. this can make it more difficult for you to get pregnant or make someone pregnant.if you're worried about co-dydramol and your fertility, talk to your doctor.







    can i drive or ride a bike with it?
    


co-dydramol can make you feel sleepy or dizzy. if this happens to you, do not drive, ride a bike or operate machinery until you feel better.







    will recreational drugs affect it?
    


if you take recreational drugs such as cannabis, cocaine or heroin while you're taking co-dydramol, you're more likely to get the serious side effects of the dihydrocodeine in co-dydramol. these include breathing difficulties, heart problems, seizures or fits and even going into a coma.some recreational drugs, such as cannabis, make you more likely to have other side effects from the dihydrocodeine. these include sleepiness and dizziness.taking heroin while you're on prescribed co-dydramol is particularly dangerous. you're more likely to get all the side effects of the dihydrocodeine in co-dydramol, including addiction.speak to your doctor if you think you might take recreational drugs while taking co-dydramol.











related conditions

headaches
joint pain
migraine
period pain
toothache





useful resources

healthunlocked: co-dydramol forum
migraine action: charity
pain uk: charity





          page last reviewed: 24 july 2020
          next review due: 24 july 2023
        



